An example is shown in the figure on the right with a water jet.
This factor is not likely to explain the large reduction in exponent however.
The Strouhal number,
When a rectangular jet impinges on a sharp edged object such as a wedge, a feedback loop can be established resulting in a nearly pure tone.
The value of '''D''' in the figure represents the ratio of the lateral disturbance displacement to the nozzle width; the disturbances were minute.
There are several ways that feedback can occur.
Vincenz Strouhal was the first to scientifically investigate the sound emitted by flow around a rigid cylinder.
The flow from a circular orifice impinging on a toroidal ring of the same diameter as the orifice will result in a tone; it is called a ''ring tone''.
Large centrifugal fans sometimes use radial inlet blades that can be rotated to control the flow into the fan; they create a swirling flow.
Like the Aeolian tone, the feedback is Class I.
The preferred frequencies in shallow cavities are different from those for the edge tone.
If the fluid is in the lower channel, some fluid is fed back to the jet origin via the black tube and pushes the jet to the upper channel.
The orifice is 1/16 inch wide and the sharp edge is 1/4 inch from the jet orifice.
In several whistles, three stages have been identified (edge tone).
The sound from a Category I whistle is primarily a ''byproduct'' of source motion.
The densities are so different the back reaction is often ignored.
The effective length of the tube is fixed since the radiation impedances at each end are fixed.
Theodor von Karman identified and analyzed the flow behind objects like a cylinder and since then this special flow has been called the ''Karman vortex street''.
The blade geometry was highly variable in the tests, so it is likely that the negative dependence of the dimensionless force on Reynolds number is the major factor.
Other researchers used blade thickness as the characteristic dimension.
At the lower limit of '''h''' the second term disappears.
In this category the back reaction is insufficient to strongly control source motion, so whistles are not in this category.
An edge tone occurs when a jet impinges on a fixed surface.
At these speeds and spacings, the feedback was normally Class II, but reflecting surfaces as far away as three meters and with proper phasing, controlled the tone, converting the feedback to Class III.
The sound field is sufficiently intense for it to appear on a shadowgraph as shown in the figure on the right (from M.G.
Two scaling laws were used; the Strouhal number was graphed as a function of Reynolds number.
The first version is used for dynamic similarity of the fluid motion in whistles while the second version is used for dynamic similarity of the acoustical motion in whistles.
If a stainless steel tube has one side at room temperature and the other side in contact with liquid helium, spontaneous acoustic oscillations are observed.
There are two geometries that have been studied.
Phillips found the lateral velocity fluctuations were two orders of magnitude greater than the longitudinal, so the lift dipole is 20&nbsp;dB above the drag dipole.
Each time a vortex is shed, the drag velocity fluctuation '''u''' has the same sign, but the lateral velocity fluctuation '''v''', has opposite signs, since the vortex is shed on alternate sides.
The ratio of the dynamic volumetric flow rate to the steady volumetric flow rate.
Now the Reynolds number can be derived directly from the dimensionless form of the momentum equation.
Wilson, et al., in their study of human whistling (see below), pointed out the importance of including the symmetry or asymmetry of the unstable flow in addition to the feedback classes listed below.
The sound field was measured and clearly indicated a dipole whose axis was aligned with the jet axis.
In 1883 he began experimenting with pea-whistle designs that could produce an intense sound that could grab attention from over a mile away.
The edge is part of a generally cylindrical tube of length '''L'''.
The metal pipe shown was used in the Concorde cockpit to provide cooling air to the pilots, but its loud tone got it canceled.
As can be seen, dynamic similarity was achieved with both air and water.
An '''aerodynamic whistle''' (or '''call''') is a simple aerophone, an instrument which produces sound from a stream of gas, most commonly air.
Nozzle diameter '''d''' characterizes the sound power while the separation distance '''h''' characterizes the frequency.
When amplification can occur a small variation can grow and have important influence on the sound field created.
The characteristic speed, '''U''', is that in the exit plane, and the characteristic dimension '''L''' is the nozzle width, to which the cell dimensions are proportional.
A resonance equation is shown below.
After observing the problems that local police were having with effectively communicating with rattles, he realised that his whistle designs could be used as an effective aid to their work.
The reason for including this type of whistle is that we tend to think that it is necessary for a forced jet flow to encounter a solid material to create a whistle.
The flow over the edge results in an applied force and a dipole-like sound field.
This pattern is called a ''hysteresis loop''.
This relationship expressed in terms of Strouhal Numbers is:
To compare them we need to take into account the established ratios that are relevant to whistle operation.
was used as the scaling factor.
The unique feature of this whistle is that the tone sounds only with flow through the orifice from outside; it is an acoustical diode.
An example of the original system is shown in the figure on the left.
Classic examples are Aeolian tones that result in galloping power lines, or the Tacoma Narrows Bridge (galloping Gertie).
A drawing of typical blade construction is shown in the figure on the right.
Nature knows nothing of the specific measurement systems we use; it cares only about ratios between the various forces, time scales, and the several dimensions.
This results in a non-uniform sound field, unlike the monopole whistle.
Now the Mach number can be derived directly from the dimensionless form of the momentum equation.
The characteristic speed must be '''U''' the jet exit speed.
It converts steady energy to time dependent energy.
Blowing over the edge of a jug or bottle can create a nearly pure tone of low frequency.
This whistle is similar in many respects to the hole tone, in particular the teapot whistle.
Under certain conditions, the flow in the reversal region becomes unstable, resulting in a period rotating force on the outer tube.
At that point, the cavity flow and the local pressure are sufficient to force the jet to move away from the cavity.
If the edge tone is relevant, perhaps the characteristic dimension should be the gap between the blades.
It was found that the feedback was Class III and the Strouhal Numbers ranging from 0.3 to 0.4 were associated with a single vortex pattern (Stage I) across the gap while Strouhal numbers ranging from 0.6 to 0.9 were associated with two vortices across the gap (Stage II).
Flow instability is the engine for whistles.
The integer '''n''' is closely related to the number of vortices en route to the edge.
This cannot be exact since the driving end is not open.
Thus the source is yet another version of a monopole-like geometry; the volumetric flow rate is a cylindrical area between the jet and cavity.
For this type of source, the sound is emitted radially so the sound field is the same in every direction and decays with the inverse square of the distance.
They can be used for hunting, controlling dogs, as toys, for sports events, as musical instruments, for police or military use, as ship or lighthouse fog horns, as steam whistles on trains, for scheduling and emergency use in industrial settings such as mines, in fluidic circuits, in domestic settings such at the tea pot whistle, for reducing foam bubbles, and for human whistling.
At near shutoff, where the swirl is very high, ''rotating blade stall'' of the fan blades occurs.
In Australia, there is the ''Tenterfield Fox Whistle'' and the ''Traditional Fox Whistle'' that appear to operate as hole tones.
This device is not considered a true whistle since the oscillations decay as the temperatures equalize.
In a whistle, the instability starts at some point in the three dimensional region and then moves along some path in that region as the local variables change.
Kim found a similar result; the Strouhal number increased with Reynolds number and then stayed constant as shown in the lower figure on the right.
Many present day wind instruments are inheritors of these early whistles.
If the jet was not powered, but warmer than the surrounding fluid, it would rise and when encountering the surface would generate a similar feedback system.
For shorter cavities and lower Mach Numbers, there is a ''shear-layer mode'', while for longer cavities and higher Mach Numbers there is a ''wake mode''.
The Strouhal relationship suggests that the jet Mach number and the ratio of effective pipe length to the edge distance are important in a first approximation.
The lower figure on the right shows the correlation coefficient as a function of distance along the cylinder and is from the Etkin, et al.
Using the dipole model, the calculated force was found to be nearly proportional to , confirming the correctness of the new characteristic speed.
In this case, however, there can be three ''modes'' of motion: symmetric (toroidal), asymmetric (sinuous), and helical.
Unstable fluid motion or the sound generated by it can feedback to the source and control it, much like audio feedback squeal.
The figure on the right is example of a small ''rigid'' sphere that is moving back and forth in a given direction.
A review of the literature produced the figure on the right for the Strouhal number.
His whistle is still used by many forces worldwide.
The cross section of a common whistle is shown in the figure on the right.
This equation, applicable for , shows the mean speed '''U''' of the jet at the orifice as the characteristic speed and the distance '''h''' from orifice to the edge as the characteristic dimension.
An arbitrary constant '''β''' was used to represent the impedance at the junction of the side branch with the duct.
An annular duct carries the fluid that creates the annular jet.
For example, the vortex street behind a stick underwater might radiate at audible frequencies but not sufficiently to be heard by a Scuba diver.
The bracketed term includes two feedback loop speeds; the downstream speed is the speed of the vortices '''u''' and the upstream speed is that of sound.
It was discussed by Baron Rayleigh in his Theory of Sound.
Wilson and his colleagues have simulated the human whistle by creating a cylinder 2.04 inches in diameter with a rounded orifice at one end that supplied a jet and another rounded orifice at the other end of the same diameter and on the same axis.
The ''fluid mechanical'' Strouhal and ''acoustical'' Strouhal numbers were
At any particular flow speed it is possible for one of several loops to be dominant, depending on how that speed was achieved.
Real whistles are only approximations to this idealized model.
The equation above indicated 146&nbsp;Hz and the Nielsen equation indicated 138&nbsp;Hz.
A weak negative Reynolds number effect is likely.
Prior to the introduction of the whistle, handkerchiefs were used by the umpires to signal to the players.
There are others that are both below audible frequencies and below audible levels.
In the recent past, a number of researchers have attempted to explain the origin of the sound.
It is subject to frequency jumps and hysteresis loops.
Back reactions of air on an air source or water on a water source can be different.
The sound field may be similar to that created by oscillatory flow from a pipe, except for presence of the supersonic jet structure which can strongly modify the directivity.
Strictly speaking, they are fluid mechanical whistles since they occur in gases, such as air or steam, as well as in liquids, such as water.
The unstable flow creates a set of symmetric (ring) vortices that later impinge on the physical ring.
There does not appear to be any research on this configuration.
The yellow plastic pipe is actually a child’s toy that sounds when the pipe is whirled around.
When a subsonic jet impinges on a cavity, jet instability becomes part of the feedback loop as with the hole tone.
Thus, fluid instability can be described as a three dimensional region with flow speed on one axis, disturbance amplitude on the second, and velocity profile on the third.
On an airfoil there would be a correlation length less than the wingspan resulting in a number independent dipoles arrayed laterally.
Supersonic flows can be quite complex and some tentative explanations are available.
The characteristic dimension of the tube, '''L2''', is fixed; the characteristic speed,'''''', is fixed.
In many important cases, linear thinking (small cause = small effect) is fallacious.
Studies of this whistle have shown that dynamic similarity based on the pipe diameter '''d''' as the characteristic length scale, and inlet mean flow speed '''U''' as the characteristic speed was not achieved, as shown in the lower figure on the right.
The shock cells of the jet interact with the shock in front of the cavity (the flow in the cavity being subsonic).
Perhaps it would be more correct to generalize the concept to a particular impedance mismatch rather than a solid object.
The ratio of the actual dynamic force to the steady momentum..
The hole tone has been rediscovered in the form of the tea pot whistle.
Orifice plates as flow meters typically have a 5 to 1 speed range, while turbine meters may have up to 100 to 1 range.
The Strouhal number data showed clearly the almost linear relation between frequency and initial jet speed.
On contact with the surface, a slight jet asymmetry caused an unsymmetrical raised surface that fed back to the jet origin and began a process that looked like a weak version of the flow instability figure.
There are two characteristic dimensions (cavity width '''L''' associated with vortex development and cavity depth '''D''' associated with acoustical response).
The first geometry is flow exterior to the cavity such as on an aircraft.
Both Ratchet rattles and whistles were used to call for back-up in areas where neighborhood beats overlapped, and following their success in London, the whistle was adopted by most police in the United Kingdom.
The presence of a dipole sound field and a periodic force proportional to  was confirmed by Powell.
To determine the end corrections, two additional dimensions are needed: the diameter of the orifice '''d1''' and the diameter of the tube '''d2'''.
There are two characteristic length scales.
Lee and others have shown it in Strouhal number form as
The fundamental difference of these whistles from those described above is that there are now two sets of characteristic variables.
At higher speeds the Strouhal Number is close to that for the Aeolian tone.
One uniqueness of this whistle compared to the others described is that the length of the feedback path can be chosen arbitrarily.
The phenomenon of swirl instability has been shown to occur in other situations.
These whistles are unlike the others listed above; the sound is generated without interaction with a solid; it is truly an aerodynamic whistle.
The flow reverses at the closed end of the outer tube and exits through the inner tube.
In 1987, Ron Foxcroft released the Fox 40 pealess whistle, designed to replace the pea whistle and be more reliable.
most have boundaries around them such as the Hole Tone described below.
As found in the Aeolian tone, the vertical component (lift) is large and results in a dipole-like sound field at the wedge (shown in the lower figure) and a much weaker horizontal component (drag) at twice the frequency (not shown).
Photographs taken from space have shown alternate arrangements of clouds around mountains; The figure on the right shows an example.
The upper figure on the right shows the basic arrangement of one version of the device.
In most cases, the wind over the peak of a dune sets the sand on the dune into motion, and it is that motion that generates the sound.
In these whistles, the flow instability is asymmetric, often resulting in rows of alternate vortices and the sound generation is associated with fluctuations of applied force.
This simple diagram suggests that there is a force applied to the wedge whose angle varies as the vortices pass.
The characteristic speed '''U''' is that of the annular jet.
It is subject to frequency jumps and hysteresis loops similar to the hole tone.
The whistles described in this article are in a subclass where only the fluid is in motion and there is no significant dependent motion of the interacting solid.
The characteristic dimension '''D''' is the cavity diameter and it appears that both cavities have similar dimensions.
Similarity is best exposed by determining a speed, '''U''', that is characteristic of the dynamics, and a dimension, '''L''', that is characteristic of the geometry.
The temperature in a sound wave varies, but since it is so small normally it is common to neglect its effects.
If the measurement bandwidth is broad and the measurement distance is out of the near field, there are two dynamic factors (Strouhal number and dimensionless force), that can cause the exponent to be less than six.
In four of the distances tested, there were jumps between Stage I and Stage II.
The jet disturbance (vortex) speed from orifice to edge will vary with mean speed '''U''', edge distance '''h''', and slit width '''d''' as suggested in the Edge Tone section.
Bies determined that the characteristic speed was the blade velocity, , and the characteristic dimension was the tooth area.
Note the nearly pure tone at 2000&nbsp;Hz with a Strouhal number of 0.21 protruding above the turbulent sound spectrum.
These whistles generate enough sound to be detected but at frequencies below 1&nbsp;Hz they are inaudible.
The results are shown in the figure on the right.
When there is phase coherent gain of the two aspects, they operate as Class III monopole sources.
There are others whose sound levels are below the audible range of humans.
Baron Rayleigh was aware of this whistle; it was called the ''bird call'' then.
The frequency of the sound is closely related to the rotation rate of the cavity vortex.
Because of the nonlinearity, there can be several possible conditions for a given flow speed or geometry.
Many whistles, especially those with Class III feedback, require use of both numbers (see (Monopole-Dipole Whistles).
The back reaction of the medium is an ''determinant'' of source motion.
One important source of instability in a fluid is the presence of a velocity gradient or shear layer with an inflection point.
There are several ways to describe the feedback process.
Small disturbances to the laminar flow cause the transition.
It is likely that the Rossby number  would be a valuable dynamic similarity number.
The mountain tones discussed above are examples of tones that are inaudible because they are below the frequency range of humans.
The upper equation is the modified drag equation with both drag component '''u''' and lift component '''v''' and the cross sectional area '''dL''' where '''d''' is the cylinder diameter and '''w''' is the length.
Such a phenomenon was observed, but not photographed, in the Owens Valley of California.
Flow over a cavity in a surface can result in excitation of a feedback loop and nearly pure tones.
Strong tones can occur in both rectangular and circular jets when the pressure ratio is greater than the critical and the flow becomes supersonic on exit, resulting in a sequence of repetitive shock cells.
Any periodicity at the edge is likely submerged in the Class III feedback from the jug volume.
Measurements showed that the vortex whistle was created by a rotating asymmetric vortex which created a rotating force vector in the plane of the exit and a rotating dipole sound field.
It should be noted that three-dimensional (viscous) effects occur at low Reynolds numbers so dynamic similarity is not achieved there.
Cho and Mote found that the Strouhal number  was between 0.1 and 0.2 where '''h''' was the blade thickness.
The previous whistles occur at low flow speeds, this whistle occurs at very high speeds.
The figure on the right shows an example.
Cavities can be separated into ''shallow'' or ''deep'' ones, the difference being that for deep cavities a Class III (acoustical) feedback path may be controlling.
For many years, people have heard tones from the motion of sand, mostly on sand dunes.
The characteristic dimension is that of the object lateral to the flow and the characteristic speed is that of the impinging flow.
There are two characteristic speeds (flow speed '''U''' associated with vortex development and sound speed  associated with cavity response).
It may be mouth-operated, or powered by air pressure, steam, or other means.
Unlike the pipe organ, however, these instruments have side ports to change the resonance frequency and thus the acoustical Strouhal number.
It is a transcendental equation where '''Ac''' is the cross sectional area of a cylindrical cavity of depth '''L'''.
In the study by Henrywood, it was noted that Helmholtz resonance could occur at low speeds.
The asymmetry sends waves back to the nozzle which sets up a Class III feedback loop and a strong periodic dipole sound field; it is called ''screech tone''.
To invoke dynamic similarity, the characteristic speed in a study was chosen to be the average speed of the jet at the orifice '''U''' (deduced from measured volumetric flow rate) and the characteristic length was chosen to be the orifice diameter '''δ'''.
There does not appear to be any detailed research on police whistle operation.
Another characteristic length associated with sound power is '''αL''', the position of the gauze.
There are several accurate flow meters that are designed to take advantage of the constancy of the Strouhal Number with Reynolds Number to provide a linear relationship between flow rate and measured frequency.
There are a number Class I devices.
There are a number of other geometric variations, all of which operate in similar fashion.
As the speed increases, the flow, although laminar, becomes unstable and vortices are shed ''alternately''.
It is interesting that the number is very close to that found by Strouhal for flow over a cylinder.
The driving force is the flow over the jug edge so one might expect an edge tone dipole sound field.
There appear to be two stages and the feedback is likely Class II if the tube is lshort.
