A person is diligently tasked with the conundrum of choosing to be loyal to the company or to blow the whistle on the company’s wrongdoing.
Publeaks is designed to protect whistleblowers.
General deterioration in health and self care has been described.
Barry Adams explains the options  as,"The list of negative consequences to whistleblowing seems endless: broken promises to fix the problem, disillusionment, isolation, humiliation, formation of an "anti-you" group, loss of job, questioning of the whistleblower's mental health, vindictive tactics to make the individual's work more difficult and/or insignificant, assassination of character, formal reprimand, and difficult court proceedings (Ahern & McDonald, 2002; Brodie, 1998; Fletcher et al., 1998; Wilmot, 2000)."
The Act, which came into force on April 15, 2007, applies to most of the federal public sector, approximately 400,000 public servants.
When a leader challenges a whistle blower, there is an automatic indictment of the leader's character.
It isn't until these wrongdoings bleed into the top officials that corporate wrongdoings are seen by the public.
The information of alleged wrongdoing can be classified in many ways: violation of company policy/rules, law, regulation, or threat to public interest/national security, as well as fraud, and corruption.
A primary reason for the death penalty would be that they have potentially endangered an entire people, therefore being responsible for any harm to come as a result.
The Whistleblowers' Protection Bill, 2011 was passed by the Lok Sabha on 28 December 2011. and by the Rajyasabha on 21 February 2014.
Among the more publicly visible whistleblower activists are Thomas M. Devine of GAP, Cathy James of PCaW, Mark Worth of Blueprint for Free Speech.
Not all disclosures lead to an investigation as the Act sets out the jurisdiction of the Commissioner and gives the option not to investigate under certain circumstances.
There are some reasons to believe that people are more likely to take action with respect to unacceptable behavior, within an organization, if there are complaint systems that offer not just options dictated by the planning and control organization, but a ''choice'' of options for absolute confidentiality.
The term ''whistle-blower'' comes from the whistle a referee uses to indicate an illegal or foul play.
This campaign directed at whistleblowers with the goal of eliminating them from the organization is referred to as mobbing.
Legal protection can also be granted to protect whistleblowers, but that protection is subject to many stipulations.
Another US law that specifically protects whistleblowers is the Lloyd–La Follette Act of 1912.
Where whistleblowers persist in raising their concerns, they increasingly risk detriments such as dismissal.
An employee will, however, not breach his duty of good faith if he reports an irregularity to an authority and
However, poor experiences of whistleblowing can cause a prolonged and prominent assault upon staff well being.
Federal whistleblower legislation includes a statute protecting all government employees.
Retrieved March 30, 2016, from http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/582797_6
The  Office of the Public Sector Integrity Commissioner of Canada (PSIC) provides a safe and confidential mechanism enabling public servants and the general public to disclose wrongdoings committed in the public sector.
Especially with media outlets using words like "traitor" and "treason" to associate with whistleblowers.
Still, a wide variety of federal and state laws protect employees who call attention to violations, help with enforcement proceedings, or refuse to obey unlawful directions.
Depression is often reported by whistleblowers, and suicidal thoughts may occur in up to about 10%.
It operates on the GlobaLeaks software developed by the  Hermes Center for Transparency and Digital Human Rights, which supports whistleblower-oriented technologies internationally.
In August 2010, the Public Interest Disclosure and Protection of Persons Making the Disclosures Bill, 2010 was introduced into the Lok Sabha, lower house of the Parliament of India.
Employees in academia, business or government might become aware of serious risks to health and the environment, but internal policies might pose threats of retaliation to those who report these early warnings.
The Swiss Council of States agreed on a draft amendment of the Swiss Code of Obligations in September 2014.
In some cases, external whistleblowing is encouraged by offering monetary reward.
A '''whistleblower''' (also '''whistle-blower''' or '''whistle blower''') is a person who exposes any kind of information or activity that is deemed illegal, unethical, or not correct within an organization that is either private or public.
International Whistleblowers is an example of an organization involved in delivering a third party service for whistleblowers.
Depending on the circumstances, it is not uncommon for whistleblowers to be ostracized by their co-workers, discriminated against by future potential employers, or even fired from their organization.
* where the employee must assume that the competent authority will be hindered in investigating the irregularity, or
As such, workers remain afraid to blow the whistle, in fear that they will not be believed or they have lost faith in believing that anything will happen if they do speak out.
The Office’s goal is to enhance public confidence in Canada’s federal public institutions and in the integrity of public servants.
It all depends on the level of what information one reveals and to whom.
It is important to recognize that in any relationship which demands loyalty the relationship works both ways and involves mutual enrichment.
''For purposes of the English Wikipedia, this section emphasizes the English-speaking world and covers other regimes only insofar as they represent exceptionally greater or lesser protections.''
People who choose to act as a whistleblower often suffer retaliation from their employer.
Rosemary O'Leary explains this in her short volume on a topic called guerrilla government.
It is based on the UK's Public Interest Disclosure Act.
The 1st and 14th amendment protects to an extent and guarantees protection for practical allegations from retaliation.
Conversely, the emotional strain of a whistleblower investigation is devastating to the accused's family.
It is an extreme form of workplace bullying wherein the group is set against the targeted individual.
The negative results of being a whistleblower could be one being seen as a traitor, a hero, or just one of the majority (97 percent) whistleblowers who are simply disgruntled with a perceived but not true unfairness.
There are examples of "early warning scientists" being harassed for bringing inconvenient truths about impending harm to the notice of the public and authorities.
Both can have different results that depend on many factors.
For example, in the United States, most whistleblower protection laws provide for limited "make whole" remedies or damages for employment losses if whistleblower retaliation is proven.
The classifications relate to the type of organizations someone chooses to whistle-blow on: private sector, or public sector.
Robert A. Larmer describes the standard view of whistleblowing in the Journal of Business Ethics by explaining that an employee possesses prima facie (based on the first impression; accepted as correct until proved otherwise) duties of loyalty and confidentiality to their employers and that whistleblowing cannot be justified except on the basis of a higher duty to the public good.
This is a relatively new phenomenon and has been developed due to whistleblower discrimination.
Tor, a highly accessible anonymity network, is one that is frequently used by whistleblowers around the world.
In the federal civil service, the government is prohibited from taking, or threatening to take, any personnel action against an employee because the employee disclosed information that he or she reasonably believed showed a violation of law, gross mismanagement, and gross waste of funds, abuse of authority, or a substantial and specific danger to public safety or health.
One must understand the definition of whistleblowing to logically determine if the act itself is wrong.
They most likely are fired because they are an at-will employee, which means they can be fired without a reason.
An amendment of article 362(1) adds articles 321abis to 321asepties to the list of provisions that may not be overruled by labour and bargaining agreements.
As of June 2014, a total of 9 reports have been tabled in Parliament.
However, many whistleblowers report there exists a widespread "shoot the messenger" mentality by corporations or government agencies accused of misconduct and in some cases whistleblowers have been subjected to criminal prosecution in reprisal for reporting wrongdoing.
Over 50 countries have adopted more limited protections as part of their anti-corruption, freedom of information, or employment laws.
Whistleblowers also fear that their revealings of a company's ill practices may not sit well with the public thus another reason why individuals considering blowing the whistle choose not to.
“...whoever knowingly and willfully communicates, furnishes, transmits, or otherwise makes available to an unauthorized person, or publishes, or uses in any manner prejudicial to the safety or interest of the United States or for the benefit of any foreign government to the detriment of the United States any classified information.”
This mistreatment also deters others from coming forward with concerns.
Such extreme experiences of threat and loss inevitably cause severe distress and sometimes mental illness, sometimes lasting for years afterwards.
The discussions of whistleblowing and employee loyalty usually assume that the concept of loyalty is irrelevant to the issue or, more commonly, that whistleblowing involves a moral choice in which the loyalty that an employee owes an employer comes to be pitted against the employee’s responsibility to serve the public interest.
Even without a statute, numerous decisions encourage and protect whistleblowing on grounds of public policy.
One of the most interesting questions with respect to internal whistleblowers is why and under what circumstances do people either act on the spot to stop illegal and otherwise unacceptable behavior or report it.
Article 321ater introduces an obligation on employees to report irregularities to their employer before reporting to an authority.
Over the years, I have learned that the motivations driving guerrillas are diverse.
The Public Interest Disclosure and Protection of Persons Making the Disclosures Bill, 2010 was renamed as The Whistleblowers' Protection Bill, 2011 by the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice.
In the private sector corporate groups can easily hide wrongdoings by individual branches.
US civic activist Ralph Nader is said to have coined the phrase, but he in fact put a positive spin on the term in the early 1970s to avoid the negative connotations found in other words such as "informers" and "snitches".
The stresses involved in whistleblowing can be huge.
Whistleblowing in the private sector is typically not as high-profile or openly discussed in major news outlets, though occasionally, third parties expose human rights violations and exploitation of workers.
Is it right to report the shady or suspect practices of the company one works for or perhaps even the government?
Some third party groups offer protection to whistleblowers, but that protection can only go so far.
The coming  ISO 37001 – anti-bribery management systems standard, includes anonymous reporting as one of the criteria for the new standard.
It is probable that many people do not even consider blowing the whistle, not only because of fear of retaliation, but also because of fear of losing their relationships at work and outside work.
In Jamaica, the Protected Disclosures Act, 2011 received assent in March 2011.
Organizations also often attempt to ostracise and isolate whistleblowers by undermining their concerns by suggesting that these are groundless, carrying out inadequate investigations or by ignoring them altogether.
While there are laws in place to protect whistleblowers, many employees fear for their jobs due to direct or indirect threats from their employers or the other parties involved.
''Persecution of whistleblowers'' has become a serious issue in many parts of the world:
However, whistleblowing in the public sector organization is more likely to result in federal felony charges and jail-time.
The consequences vary from a corporate whistleblower to federal whistleblower.
The first US environmental law to include an employee protection was the Clean Water Act of 1972.
Those who become whistleblowers can choose to bring information or allegations to surface either internally or externally.
Increased stress related physical illness has also been described in whistleblowers.
The Bill was approved by the cabinet in June, 2011.
In passing the 2002 Sarbanes–Oxley Act, the Senate Judiciary Committee found that whistleblower protections were dependent on the "patchwork and vagaries" of varying state statutes.
In the case of many like Edward Snowden, whistleblowing is seen as the last ethically right thing to do.
Government employees could be at a similar risk for bringing threats to health or the environment to public attention, although perhaps this is less likely.
In these cases, depending on the information's severity and nature, whistleblowers may report the misconduct to lawyers, the media, law enforcement or watchdog agencies, or other local, state, or federal agencies.
Similar protections were included in subsequent federal environmental laws, including the Safe Drinking Water Act (1974), Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (1976), Toxic Substances Control Act of 1976, Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (through 1978 amendment to protect nuclear whistleblowers), Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA, or the Superfund Law) (1980), and the Clean Air Act (1990).
Previously, he has served in various senior roles in the public service, including as Associate Deputy Minister of Justice, Executive Director and Deputy Head of the Office of Indian Residential Schools Resolution of Canada, and as Chair of the National Parole Board.
Statutes state that an employer shall not take any adverse employment actions any employee in retaliation for a good faith report of a whistleblowing action or cooperating in anyway in an investigation, proceeding, or lawsuit arising under said action.
There are comprehensive laws in New Zealand and South Africa.
Whistleblowers may also experience immense stress as a result of litigation regarding detriments such as unfair dismissal, which they often face with imperfect support or no support at all from unions.
Article 321aquarter provides that an employee may exceptionally directly report to an authority.
Simply because private corporations usually have stricter regulations that suppress potential whistleblowers.
Questioning the whistleblower makes the accused guilty until proven innocent.
The Act encourages whistleblowers by promising them a percentage of the money recovered by the government and by protecting them from employment retaliation.
Discussions on whistleblowing generally revolve around three topics: attempts to define whistleblowing more precisely, debates about whether and when whistleblowing is permissible, and debates about whether and when one has an obligation to blow the whistle.
Questions about the legitimacy of whistleblowing, the moral responsibility of whistleblowing, and the appraisal of the institutions of whistleblowing are part of the field of political ethics.
Private company employees in particular might be at risk of being fired, demoted, denied raises and so on for bringing environmental risks to the attention of appropriate authorities.
Following dismissal, whistleblowers may struggle to find further employment due to damaged reputations, poor references and blacklisting.
Private whistleblowing has grown in notoriety lately due in part to an increase in reports of suppressed sexual harassment and assaults, as well as corruption and discriminatory practices.
The Tribunal can grant remedies in favour of complainants and order disciplinary action against persons who take reprisals.
Recognizing the public value of whistleblowing has been increasing over the last 50 years.
The Government of India has been considering adopting a whistleblower protection law for several years.
In extreme cases, this technique involves the organization or manager proposing that the complainant’s mental health is unstable.
The Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 2011 has received the Presidential assent on May 9, 2014 and the same has been subsequently published in the official gazette of the Government of India on May 9, 2014 by the Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India.
Some examples of private sector whistleblowing are when an employee reports to someone in a higher position such as a manager, or a third that is isolated from the individual chapter, such as their lawyer or the police.
Some even accuse them of solely pursuing personal glory and fame, or view their behavior as motivated by greed in qui tam cases.
Most whistleblowers are internal whistleblowers, who report misconduct on a fellow employee or superior within their company.
Some deadlines are as short as 10 days (Arizona State Employees have 10 days to file a "Prohibited Personnel Practice" Complaint before the Arizona State Personnel Board), while others are up to 300 days.
The Netherlands has measures in place to mitigate the risks of whistleblowing: the whistleblower advice centre (Adviespunt Klokkenluiders) offers advice to whistleblowers, and the Parliament recently passed a proposal to establish a so-called house for whistleblowers, to protect them from the severe negative consequences that they might endure (Kamerstuk, 2013).
Revealing whistleblower identities automatically puts their life in harm’s way.
Exceptions apply in cases
After many federal whistleblowers were scrutinized in high-profile media cases, laws were finally introduced to protect government whistleblowers.
The government of Ireland committed to adopting a comprehensive whistleblower protection law in January 2012.
It creates a comprehensive system for the protection of whistleblowers in the public and private sector.
To be a whistleblower takes a huge amount of bravery.
Such ''qui tam'' lawsuits must be filed under seal, using special procedures to keep the claim from becoming public until the federal government makes its decision on direct prosecution.
Many NGOs advocate for stronger and more comprehensive legal rights and protections for whistleblowers.
The bill reportedly covers both the public and private sectors.
The first US law adopted specifically to protect whistleblowers was the 1863 United States False Claims Act (revised in 1986), which tried to combat fraud by suppliers of the United States government during the American Civil War.
Although whistleblowers are often protected under law from employer retaliation, there have been many cases where punishment for whistleblowing has occurred, such as termination, suspension, demotion, wage garnishment, and/or harsh mistreatment by other employees.
This is possible thanks to asymmetrically encrypted web solutions, with no tracking of the whistleblower IP addresses nor storage of meta-data.
Whistleblowers Australia is an association for those who have exposed corruption or any form of malpractice, especially if they were then hindered or abused.
To prevail on a claim, a federal employee must show that a protected disclosure was made, that the accused official knew of the disclosure, that retaliation resulted, and that there was a genuine connection between the retaliation and the employee's action.
There have also been cases of young scientists being discouraged from entering controversial scientific fields for fear of harassment.
The definition of ethics is the moral principles that govern a person's or group's behavior.
However, sometimes employees may blow the whistle as an act of revenge.
* where there is a direct and serious hazard to life, to health, to safety, or to the environment.
The draft introduces articles 321abis to 321asepties, 328(3), 336(2)(d).
Thus, poor practices remain hidden behind a wall of silence, and prevent any organization from experiencing the improvements that may be afforded by intelligent failure.
An increasing number of companies and authorities choose third party services in which the whistleblower is anonymous also towards the third party service provider.
The draft does not improve on protection against dismissal for employees who report irregularities to their employer.
There are exceptions in place for whistleblowers who are at-will employees.
Also, reports of founded wrongdoing are presented before the House of Commons and the Senate in accordance with The Act.
However, the "original source" must also be the first to file a federal civil complaint for recovery of the federal funds fraudulently obtained, and must avoid publicizing the claim of fraud until the US Justice Department decides whether to prosecute the claim itself.
In the United States, both State and Federal statutes have been put in place to protect whistleblowers from retaliation.
The amendment does not provide for employees anonymously filing their observations of irregularities.
Deeper questions and theories of whistleblowing and why people choose to do so can be studied through an ethical approach.
The employee must weigh their options, expose the company and stand the moral and ethical high ground, or expose the company, lose their job, their reputation and potentially the ability to be employed again.
Emotional strain on the accused from the whistle blower is also unconstrained.
Whistleblowers are sometimes seen as selfless martyrs for public interest and organizational accountability; others view them as "traitors" or "defectors."
Whistleblowers who continue to pursue their concerns may also face long battles with official bodies such as regulators and government departments.
Some whistleblowers who part ranks with their organizations have had their mental stability questioned, such as Adrian Schoolcraft, the NYPD veteran who alleged falsified crime statistics in his department and was forcibly committed to a mental institution.
Among them are the Government Accountability Project (GAP),  Blueprint for Free Speech, Public Concern at Work (PCaW) and the  Open Democracy Advice Center (ODAC).
Legal protection for whistleblowing varies from country to country and may depend on any of the country of the original activity, where and how secrets were revealed, and how they eventually became published or publicized.
Those who report a false claim against the federal government, and suffer adverse employment actions as a result, may have up to six years (depending on state law) to file a civil suit for remedies under the US False Claims Act (FCA).
On the other hand, if PSIC conducts an investigation and finds no wrongdoing was committed, the Commissioner must report his findings to the discloser and to the organization’s chief executive.
Under a ''qui tam'' provision, the "original source" for the report may be entitled to a percentage of what the government recovers from the offenders.
* where the employee has to anticipate dismissal,
There are many countries around the world that associate treason with the death penalty, even though whoever allegedly committed treason may or may not have caused anyone physical harm.
* the employer has not addressed the irregularity or it is obvious that the employer has insufficiently addressed the irregularity.
The ethical implications of whistleblowing can be negative as well as positive.
This fear makes it all that much harder to accurately track how prevalent whistleblowing is in the private sector.
Whistleblowing is truly an entirely ethical decision, and action.
Situations in which a person may blow the whistle are in cases of violated laws or company policy, such as sexual harassment or theft but these instances are small compared to money laundering or fraud charges on the stock market.
Externally, a whistleblower can bring allegations to light by contacting a third party outside of an accused organization.
External whistleblowers, however, report misconduct to outside persons or entities.
Monitor produced a whistleblowing policy in November 2015 which all NHS organisations in England are obliged to follow.
Whistleblowers that may be at risk of those they are exposing are now using encryption methods and anonymous content sharing software to protect their identity.
Hundreds of laws grant protection to whistleblowers, but stipulations can easily cloud that protection and leave whistleblowers vulnerable to retaliation and legal trouble.
The Act also established the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal (PSDPT) to protect public servants by hearing reprisal complaints referred by the Public Sector Integrity Commissioner.
Some whistleblowers speak of overwhelming and persistent distress, drug and alcohol problems, paranoid behaviour at work, acute anxiety, nightmares, flashbacks and intrusive thoughts.
The third party service involves utilizing an external agency to inform the individuals at the top of the organizational pyramid of misconduct, without disclosing the identity of the whistleblower.
The social impact of whistleblowing through loss of livelihood (and sometimes pension), and family strain may also impact on whistleblowers’ psychological well being.
The United States Supreme Court ruled that public sector whistleblowers are protected under First Amendment rights from any job retaliation when they raise flags over alleged corruption.
Such bodies may reproduce the “institutional silence” by employers, adding to whistleblowers’ stress and difficulties.
This technique, labelled as ‘gaslighting’ is a common, unconventional approach used by organizations to manage employees who cause difficulty by raising concerns.
This includes government departments and agencies, parent Crown corporations, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and other federal public sector bodies.
Whistleblowers face legal action, criminal charges, social stigma, and termination from any position, office, or job.
For example, of the more than 1,000 whistleblower complaints that are filed each year with the Pentagon's Inspector General, about 97 percent are not substantiated.
Similar employee protections enforced through OSHA are included in the Surface Transportation Assistance Act (1982) to protect truck drivers, the Pipeline Safety Improvement Act (PSIA) of 2002, the Wendell H. Ford Aviation Investment and Reform Act for the 21st Century ("AIR 21"), and the Sarbanes–Oxley Act, enacted on July 30, 2002 (for corporate fraud whistleblowers).
It explicitly says that anyone bullying or acting against a whistleblower could be potentially liable to disciplinary action.
It also protects from reprisal public servants who have disclosed wrongdoing and those who have cooperated in investigations.
Public trust dates back to the days of the Vietnam War.
The European Court of Human Rights ruled in 2008 that whistleblowing was protected as freedom of expression.
This fear may indeed be justified, because an individual who feels threatened by whistleblowing, may plan the career destruction of the ‘complainant’ by reporting fictitious errors or rumours.
Henry Kissinger once said that the purpose of “those who stole” the Pentagon Papers was to “undermine confidence in their government” and “raise doubts about our reliability in the minds of other governments, friend and foe, and indeed about the stability of our political system."
Investigation of retaliation against whistleblowers under 20 federal statutes falls under the jurisdiction of the Office of the Whistleblower Protection Program of the United States Department of Labor's Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA).
These laws were enacted to help prevent corruption and encourage people to expose misconduct, illegal, or dishonest activity for the good of society.
In the United States, legal protections vary according to the subject matter of the whistleblowing, and sometimes the state in which the case arises.
In 2003, the Law Commission of India recommended the adoption of the Public Interest Disclosure (Protection of Informers) Act, 2002.
Dutch media organizations also provide whistleblower support; on 9 September 2013 a number of major Dutch media outlets supported the launch of  Publeaks, which provides a secure website for people to leak documents to the media.
* where the employee is in a position to objectively demonstrate that a report to his employer will prove ineffective,
As workers attempt to address concerns, they are often met with a wall of silence and hostility by management.
The range of symptomatology shares many of the features of posttraumatic stress disorder, although there is debate about whether the trauma experienced by whistleblowers meets diagnostic thresholds.
It is believed throughout the professional world that an individual is bound to secrecy within the sector in which they work.
Some academics (such as Thomas Alured Faunce) feel that whistleblowers should at least be entitled to a rebuttable presumption that they are attempting to apply ethical principles in the face of obstacles and that whistleblowing would be more respected in governance systems if it had a firmer academic basis in virtue ethics.
Whistleblowers may also be disciplined, suspended and reported to professional bodies upon manufactured pretexts.
* a period set by the employer and no longer than 60 days has lapsed since the employee has reported the incident to his employer, and
In the case of Edward Snowden many Americans perceive his actions to be ethically and morally right.
They are also being considered in Kenya and Rwanda.
Exposing misconduct, illegal, or dishonest activity is a big fear for public employees because they feel they are going against their government and country.
Over a dozen countries have now adopted comprehensive whistleblower protection laws which create mechanisms for reporting wrongdoing and provide legal protections to the people who informed them.
