The female (doe) in North America usually weighs from .
Several local deer populations, especially in the southern states, are descended from white-tailed deer transplanted from various localities east of the Continental Divide.
If the deer feels extremely threatened, however, it may charge the person or predator causing the threat, using its antlers or, if none are present, its head to fight off the threat.
In the United States, such collisions increased from 200,000 in 1980 to 500,000 in 1991.
The deer of Virginia can run faster than their predators and have been recorded at speeds of  per hour; this ranks them amongst the fastest of all cervids, alongside the Eurasian roe deer.
The scent from the interdigital glands, which are located between the hooves of each foot, emit a yellow waxy substance with an offensive odor.
A better indication of age is the length of the snout and the color of the coat, with older deer tending to have longer snouts and grayer coats.
The current population of some 30,000 deer originated from four animals provided by Finnish Americans from Minnesota.
White-tailed deer's horizontally slit pupils allow for good night vision and color vision during the day.
In 2005, estimates put the deer population in the United States at around 30 million.
Each chamber has a different and specific function that allows the deer to eat a variety of different foods, digesting it at a later time in a safe area of cover.
Any time the temperature rises above , the males do much less traveling looking for females, else they will be subject to overheating or dehydrating.
They have skin-covered nobs on their heads.
The first type, similar to the Central American deer, consists of savannas, dry deciduous forests, and riparian corridors that cover much of Venezuela and eastern Colombia.
In some areas, American black bears are also significant predators.
A population in the Brdy area remains stable today.
In western regions of the United States and Canada, the white-tailed deer range overlaps with those of the mule deer.
If numerous males are in a particular area, then they compete more for the females.
Males leave their mothers after a year and females leave after two.
A buck's inside spread can be from 3 to 25&nbsp;in (8–64&nbsp;cm).
Typical antlers are symmetrical and the points grow straight up off the main beam.
After an outcry by hunters and other conservation ecologists, commercial exploitation of deer became illegal and conservation programs along with regulated hunting were introduced.
The Andean white-tailed deer seem to retain gray coats due to the colder weather at high altitudes, whereas the lowland savanna forms retain the reddish brown coats.
In certain parts of the eastern United States, high deer densities have caused large reductions in plant biomass, including the density and heights of certain forest wildflowers, tree seedlings, and shrubs.
Occasionally, both golden and bald eagles may capture deer fawns with their talons.
Vehicular damage can be substantial in some cases.
Atypical antlers are asymmetrical and the points may project at any angle from the main beam.
Bucks also rub trees and shrubs with their antlers and heads during the breeding season, possibly transferring scent from the forehead glands to the tree, leaving a scent other deer can detect.
It has also been introduced to New Zealand, Cuba, Jamaica, Hispaniola, Puerto Rico, Bahamas, Lesser Antilles, and some countries in Europe, such as Finland, the Czech Republic, and Serbia.
These descriptions are not the only limitations for typical and atypical antler arrangement.
Scent is deposited from these glands when deer walk through and rub against vegetation.
If the microbes necessary for digestion of a particular food (e.g., hay) are absent, it will not be digested.
Some of these deer populations may have been from as far north as the Great Lakes region to as far west as Texas, yet are also quite at home in the Appalachian and Piedmont regions of the south.
Roadside habitat modifications could also successfully decrease the number of collisions along roadways.
It will raise its tail when it is alarmed to flag the other deer.
Four major glands are the preorbital, forehead, tarsal, and metatarsal glands.
Furthermore, the incidence of Lyme disease seems to reflect deer density in the eastern United States, which suggests a strong correlation.
Deer consuming earlier-succession plants allows in enough light for nutrient competitors to invade.
In most areas where hunting may occur deer seem to develop an acute sense of time and a fondness for metro parks and golf courses.
v. dacotensis''), and northwest white-tailed deer (''O.
In the U.S., the species is the state animal of Arkansas, Illinois, Michigan, Mississippi, Nebraska, New Hampshire, Ohio, Pennsylvania, and South Carolina, the wildlife symbol of Wisconsin, and game animal of Oklahoma.
While lethal methods have municipal support as being the most effective in the short-term, there are opponents to this view who suggest that there are no significant impacts of deer extermination on the populations.
Few wild predators can afford to be picky and any will readily consume deer as carrion.
The introduction was successful, and the deer have recently begun spreading through northern Scandinavia and southern Karelia, competing with, and sometimes displacing, native species.
Sharpshooting can be an option when the area inhabited by the deer is unfit for public hunting.
In Maryland, as well as many other states, the Department of Natural Resources sets regulations on bag limits and hunting in the area depending on the deer population levels assessed.
In North America, the species is widely distributed east of the Rocky Mountains, but elsewhere, it is mostly replaced by the black-tailed or mule deer (''Odocoileus hemionus'').
During the breeding season, does release hormones and pheromones that tell bucks a doe is in heat and able to breed.
Seedlings of the three invading species rose exponentially with deer density, while the most common native species fell exponentially with deer density, because deer were preferentially eating the native species.
Males compete for the opportunity of breeding females.
High densities of deer can have severe impacts on native plants and animals in parks and natural areas; however, deer browsing can also promote plant and animal diversity in some areas.
Mature bucks over  have been recorded in the northernmost reaches of their native range, specifically, Minnesota and Ontario.
Mature bucks also produce a grunt-snort-wheeze pattern, unique to each animal, that asserts its dominance, aggression, and hostility.
To mark areas they regularly pass through, bucks make scrapes.
Deer can be seen stomping their hooves if they sense danger through sight, sound, or smell; this action leaves an excessive amount of odor for the purpose of warning other deer of possible danger.
In the case of canids and wolverines, the predators bite at the limbs and flanks, hobbling the deer, until they can reach vital organs and kill it through loss of blood.
White-tailed deer have many forms of communication involving sounds, scent, body language, and marking.
Throughout the year, deer rub-urinate, a process during which a deer squats while urinating so urine will run down the insides of the deer's legs, over the tarsal glands, and onto the hair covering these glands.
When shot at, the white-tailed deer will run at high speeds with its tail down.
Bears may sometimes attack adult deer, while lynxes, coyotes, and wolverines are most likely to take adult deer when the ungulates are weakened by harsh winter weather.
This bleat deepens as the fawn grows until it becomes the grunt of the mature deer, a guttural sound that attracts the attention of any other deer in the area.
For the first four weeks, fawns mostly lie still and hide in vegetation while their mothers forage.
In 2009, it affected more than 38,000 people.
Young females often flee from an area heavily populated with males.
If fewer males or more females are present, then the selection process will not need to be as competitive.
Many techniques have been investigated to prevent road-side mortality.
These deer over time have intermixed with the local indigenous deer (''O.
The Florida Key deer, ''O.
Though almost entirely herbivorous, white-tailed deer have been known to opportunistically feed on nesting songbirds, field mice, and birds trapped in mist nets, if the need arises.
North American male deer (also known as a buck) usually weigh , but in rare cases, bucks in excess of  have been recorded.
White-tailed deer from the tropics and the Florida Keys are markedly smaller-bodied than temperate populations, averaging , with an occasional adult female as small as .
v. gymnotis'') have antler dimensions similar to the Arizona white-tailed deer.
Bucks attempt to copulate with as many females as possible, losing physical condition, since they rarely eat or rest during the rut.
An essential procedure in understanding factors resulting in accidents is to quantify risks, which involves the driver's behavior in terms of safe speed and ability to observe the deer.
This almost certainly plays a factor in the overpopulation issues with this species.
Deer are excellent fence-jumpers, and their fear of motion and sounds meant to scare them away is soon dulled.
Length ranges from , including a tail of , and the shoulder height is .
Bucks without branching antlers are often termed "spikehorn", "spiked bucks", "spike bucks", or simply "spikes/spikers".
Hunting seasons may fluctuate in duration, or restrictions may be set to affect how many deer or what type of deer can be hunted in certain regions.
At high population densities, farmers can suffer economic damage by deer feeding on cash crops, especially in corn and orchards.
In addition to the aforementioned blowing in the presence of danger, all white-tailed deer are capable of producing audible noises unique to each animal.
H. Jacobs, J. F. Deegan, J. Neitz, B. P. Murphy, K. V. Miller and R. L. Marchinton,  "Electrophysiological measurements of spectral mechanisms in the retinas of two cervids: white-tailed deer (''Odocoileus virginianus'') and fallow deer (''Dama dama'')", ''Journal of Comparative Physiology A'', volume 174, number 5, pages 551-557, 1994.
For the 2015-2016 white-tailed deer hunting season, some areas only allow for the hunting of antler-less white-tailed deer.
This makes it very convenient to use deer-hunter orange as a safety color on caps and clothing to avoid accidental shootings during hunting seasons.
In the Americas, it is the most widely distributed wild ungulate.
They also eat acorns, fruit, and corn.
Motor vehicle collisions with deer are a serious problem in many parts of the animal's range, especially at night and during rutting season, causing injuries and fatalities among both deer and humans.
Deer experience high stress and are at high risk of dying in the process putting into question its humaneness.
Gray wolves, the leading cause of deer mortality where they overlap, co-occur with whitetails in northern Minnesota, Wisconsin, Michigan, and parts of Canada.
Good antler-growth nutritional needs (calcium) and good genetics combine to produce wall trophies in some of their range.
In 1926, Carl J. Lenander, Jr. took a white-tailed buck near Tofte, MN, that weighed  after it was field-dressed (internal organs removed) and was estimated at  when alive.
In the United States, the Virginia white-tail, ''O.
Sparring among males determines a dominance hierarchy.
They are usually weaned after 8–10 weeks, but cases have been seen where mothers have continued to allow nursing long after the fawns have lost their spots (for several months, or until the end of fall) as seen by rehabilitators and other studies.
Bobcats, Canada lynx, bears, wolverines, and packs of coyotes usually prey mainly on fawns.
Lyme disease is the most common vector-borne disease in the country and is found in twelve states in Eastern America.
Several methods have been developed in attempts to curb the population of white-tailed deer and these can be separated into lethal and non-lethal strategies.
The deer's coat is a reddish-brown in the spring and summer and turns to a grey-brown throughout the fall and winter.
White-tailed deer typically respond to the presence of potential predators by breathing very heavily (also called blowing) and fleeing.
Some taxonomists have attempted to separate white-tailed deer into a host of subspecies, based largely in morphological differences.
virginianus leucurus'', are both listed as endangered under the U.S.
Opponents of contraceptive methods point out that fertility control proves ineffective over time as populations in open field systems move about.
Bucks rub-urinate more frequently during the breeding season.
The former Seneca Army Depot in Romulus, New York, has the largest known concentration of white deer.
It is the national animal of Honduras and Costa Rica and the provincial animal of Canadian Saskatchewan and Finnish Pirkanmaa.
Populations of deer around the Great Lakes have also expanded their range northwards, due to conversion of land to agricultural uses favoring more deciduous vegetation, and local caribou and moose populations.
Fertility control also does nothing to affect the current population and the effects their grazing may be having on the forest plant make-up.
Spiked bucks are different from "button bucks" or "nubbin' bucks", that are male fawns and are generally about six to nine months of age during their first winter.
The general geographical trend is for the rut to be shorter in duration at increased latitude.
virginianus clavium'', and the Columbian white-tailed deer, ''O.
Many scavengers rely on deer as carrion, including New World vultures, raptors, foxes, and corvids.
Ecologists have also expressed concern over the facilitative effect high deer populations have on invasions of exotic plant species.
Also, a noticeable difference exists in size between male and female deer of the savannas.
The spikes can be quite long or very short.
There are concerns that the contraceptives have not been adequately researched for the effect they could have on humans who consume the treated venison.
Another factor for the strength in rutting activity is competition.
Including all races, the average summer weight of adult males is  and is  in adult females.
In 1935, white-tailed deer were introduced to Finland.
The scent from the metatarsal glands, found on the outside of each hind leg, between the ankle and hooves, may be used as an alarm scent.
Several natural predators of white-tailed deer occur.
Strong conservation efforts have allowed white deer to thrive within the confines of the depot.
White-tailed deer eat large amounts of food, commonly eating legumes and foraging on other plants, including shoots, leaves, cacti (in deserts), prairie forbs, and grasses.
Bears, which usually target fawns, often simply knock down the prey and then start eating it while it is still alive.
Another way white-tailed deer communicate is through the use of their white tail.
Although bucks do most of the marking, does visit these locations often.
Another concern in using this method is the possible spread of Chronic Wasting Disease found in the deer family and the lack of research on its effect on human populations.
White-tail incursions in the Trans-Pecos region of Texas have resulted in some hybrids.
Since slow-growing oaks need several decades to develop root systems sufficient to compete with faster-growing species, removal of the canopy prior to that point amplifies the effect of deer on succession.
The '''white-tailed deer''' (''Odocoileus virginianus''), also known as the '''whitetail''', is a medium-sized deer native to the United States, Canada, Mexico, Central America, and South America as far south as Peru and Bolivia.
Therefore, bucks with only slight asymmetry are scored as "typical".
High-density deer populations possibly could browse eastern hemlock seedlings out of existence in northern hardwood forests; however, this scenario seems unlikely, given that deer browsing is not considered the critical factor preventing hemlock re-establishment at large scales.
Enclosures can also be used as a method for minimizing the effect of deer-grazing in small areas since plants are allowed to grow without the threat of being grazed upon before reaching stable populations in the forest understory.
White-tailed deer are generalists and can adapt to a wide variety of habitats.
Often occurring in patterns known as scrape lines, scrapes are areas where a buck has used his front hooves to expose bare earth.
Conservation practices have proved so successful, in parts of their range, the white-tailed deer populations currently far exceed their cultural carrying capacity and the animal may be considered a nuisance.
As they run, the flash of their white tails warns other deer.
The smallest deer occur in the Florida Keys and in partially wooded lowlands in the neotropics.
v. borealis''), Dakota white-tailed deer (''O.
In northeastern hardwood forests, high-density deer populations affect plant succession, particularly following clear-cuts and patch cuts.
A population of white-tailed deer in New York is entirely white (except for areas like their noses and toes)—not albino—in color.
These predators frequently pick out easily caught young or infirm deer (which is believed to improve the genetic stock of a population), but can and do take healthy adults of any size.
Bobcats, still fairly widespread, usually only exploit deer as prey when smaller prey is scarce.
Fences or road under- or over passes have shown decreased deer-vehicle collisions, but are expensive and difficult to implement on a large scale.
This rather odd occurrence is best noted in Michigan, where in the lower peninsula around late August early September they begin to move out of less developed areas in favor of living near human settlements.
Increased deer populations lead to increased transmission of tick-borne diseases, which pose a threat to human health, to livestock, and to other deer.
The northern white-tailed deer (''O.
In 1884, one of the first hunts of white-tailed deer in Europe was conducted in Opočno and Dobříš (Brdy Mountains area), in what is now the Czech Republic.
In places such as Glacier National Park in Montana and several national parks in the Columbian Mountains (Mount Revelstoke National Park) and Canadian Rocky Mountains, as well as in the Yukon Territory ( Yoho National Park and Kootenay National Park), white-tailed deer are shy and more reclusive than the coexisting mule deer, elk, and moose.
The white-tailed deer of the Llanos region of Colombia and Venezuela (''O.
White-tailed deer possess many glands that allow them to produce scents, some of which are so potent they can be detected by the human nose.
Fawns release a high-pitched squeal, known as a bleat, to call out to their mothers.
In succession without deer, annual herbs and woody plants are followed by commercially valuable, shade-tolerant oak and maple.
They play a detrimental role in the preservation of native plant species at the Griffy Lake Nature Reserve as was researched and confirmed via an enclosure study done by researchers at Indiana University.
White-tailed deer from the Andes are larger than other tropical deer of this species and have thick, slightly woolly looking fur.
These savanna-adapted deer have relatively large antlers in proportion to their body size and large tails.
virginianus macrourus'') populations.
Males regrow their antlers every year.
White-tailed deer also serve as intermediate hosts for many diseases that infect humans through ticks, such as Rocky Mountain spotted fever.
When they blow, the sound alerts other deer in the area.
Deer are the primary host and vector for the adult black-legged tick, which transmits the Lyme disease bacterium to humans.
About one in 10,000 females also have antlers, although this is usually associated with hermaphroditism.
The white-tailed deer is highly variable in size, generally following Bergmann's rule that the average size is larger farther away from the Equator.
Secretions from the preorbital glands (in front of the eye) were thought to be rubbed on tree branches, but research suggests this is not so.
Females enter estrus, colloquially called the rut, in the autumn, normally in late October or early November, triggered mainly by the declining photoperiod.
Timber harvesting and forest clearance have historically resulted in increased deer population densities, which in turn have slowed the rate of reforestation following logging in some areas.
South American subspecies of white-tailed deer live in two types of environments.
The number of points, the length, or thickness of the antlers is a general indication of age, but cannot be relied upon for positive aging.
More refined than public hunting is a method referred to as Sharpshooting by the Deer Task Force in the city of Bloomington, Indiana.
They are then able to follow their mothers on foraging trips.
The white-tailed deer is a ruminant, which means it has a four-chambered stomach.
This list of subspecies of deer is more exhaustive than the list of North American subspecies, and the number of subspecies is also questionable.
This especially serves to warns fawns when their mother is alarmed.
Females give birth to one to three spotted young, known as fawns, in mid- to late spring, generally in May or June.
Deer can also cause substantial damage to landscape plants in suburban areas, leading to limited hunting or trapping to relocate or sterilize them.
Texas is home to the most white-tailed deer of any U.S. state or Canadian province, with an estimated population of over four million.
v. apurensis'' and ''O.
Bloomington, Indiana has also seen increases in white-tailed deer populations.
Bucks are generally sexually mature at 1.5 years old and begin to breed even in populations stacked with older bucks.
The Boone and Crockett or Pope and Young scoring systems also define relative degrees of typicality and atypicality by procedures to measure what proportion of the antlers are asymmetrical.
Thus, deer poorly distinguish the oranges and reds that stand out so well to humans.G.
The conversion of land adjacent to the northern Rockies into agriculture use and partial clear-cutting of coniferous trees (resulting in widespread deciduous vegetation) has been favorable to the white-tailed deer and has pushed its distribution to as far north as Fort St. John, British Columbia.
Most natural predators of white-tailed deer hunt by ambush, although canids may engage in an extended chase, hoping to exhaust the prey.
Since the second half of the 19th century, white-tailed deer have been introduced to Europe.
The Arizona and Carmen Mountains deer are smaller, but may also have impressive antlers, considering their size.
Although most often thought of as forest animals depending on relatively small openings and edges, white-tailed deer can equally adapt themselves to life in more open prairie, savanna woodlands, and sage communities as in the Southwestern United States and northern Mexico.
A doe makes maternal grunts when searching for her bedded fawns.
Although deer eat shade-tolerant plants and acorns, this is not the only way deer can shift the balance in favor of nutrient competitors.
Some does may be as young as six months when they reach sexual maturity, but the average age of maturity is 18 months.
Most primary natural predators of white-tailed deer have been basically extirpated in eastern North America, with a very small number of reintroduced red wolves, which are nearly extinct, around North Carolina and a small remnant population of Florida panthers, a subspecies of the cougar.
However, due to the heavy urban development in much of the East and fear for livestock and human lives, such ideas have ultimately been rejected by local communities and/or by government services and have not been carried through.
They suggest reducing speed limits during the winter months when deer density is exceptionally high would likely reduce deer-vehicle collisions, but this may be an impractical solution.
In western North America, it  is found in aspen parklands and deciduous river bottomlands within the central and northern Great Plains, and in mixed deciduous riparian corridors, river valley bottomlands, and lower foothills of the northern Rocky Mountain regions from South Dakota and Wyoming to northeastern British Columbia, including the Montana Valley and Foothill grasslands.
Many factors determine how intense the "rutting season" will be; air temperature is a major one.
Fawns lose their spots during the first summer and weigh from 44 to 77&nbsp;lb (20 to 35&nbsp;kg) by the first winter.
Another controversial method involves trapping the deer in a net or other trap and then administering a chemical euthanizing agent or extermination via firearm.
They can have bony protrusions up to a half inch in length, but that is very rare, and they are not the same as spikes.
Felids typically try to suffocate the deer by biting the throat.
Their diets vary by season according to availability of food sources.
Male fawns tend to be slightly larger and heavier than females.
These scrapes are used by bucks as a sort of "sign-post" by which bucks know which other bucks are in the area, and to let does know a buck is regularly passing through the area—for breeding purposes.
