The plumage is mainly white with black flight feathers and wing coverts; the black is caused by the pigment melanin.
In these situations, flocks of white storks sit out the adverse weather on the ground, standing and facing into the wind.
Within its range the white stork is distinctive when seen on the ground.
Households would notify when they wanted children by placing sweets for the stork on the window sill.
The nominate race of the white stork has a wide although disjunct summer range across Europe, clustered in the Iberian Peninsula and North Africa in the west, and much of eastern and central Europe, with 25% of the world's population concentrated in Poland, as well as parts of western Asia.
Their diet varies according to season, locality and prey availability.
Close evolutionary relationships within ''Ciconia'' are suggested by behavioural similarities and, biochemically, through analysis of both mitochondrial cytochrome ''b'' gene sequences and DNA-DNA hybridization.
When seen at a distance in flight, the white stork can be confused with several other species with similar underwing patterns, such as the yellow-billed stork, great white pelican and Egyptian vulture.
Conservation efforts successfully increased the population of birds there to 270 pairs (in 2008), largely due to the actions of the Association for the Protection and Reintroduction of Storks in Alsace and Lorraine.
Despite this, this behaviour has not commonly been observed.
German folklore held that storks found babies in caves or marshes and brought them to households in a basket on their backs or held in their beaks.
The traditional link with the newborn continues with their use in advertising for such products as nappies and birth announcements.
A survey of twelve nests found 13,352 individuals of 34 species, the most common being ''Macrocheles merdarius'', ''M.&nbsp;robustulus'', ''Uroobovella pyriformis'' and ''Trichouropoda orbicularis'', which together represented almost 85% of all the specimens collected.
Some of the earliest understanding on bird migration were initiated by an interest in white storks; ''Pfeilstörche'' ("arrow storks") were found in Europe with African arrows embedded in their bodies.
The adult has a bright red beak and red legs, the colouration of which is derived from carotenoids in the diet.
White storks arriving in Poznań province (Greater Poland Voivodeship) in western Poland in spring to breed did so some 10 days earlier in the last twenty years of the 20th century than at the end of the 19th century.
Like the adults, young also clatter their beaks.
White stork nests are habitats for an array of small arthropods, particularly over the warmer months after the birds arrive to breed.
High-frequency pair copulation is usually associated with sperm competition and high frequency of extra-pair copulation; however, extra-pair copulation is infrequent in white storks.
In Germany, the presence of a nest on a house was believed to protect against fires.
The nest is typically used year after year especially by older males.
Somewhat unexpectedly, studies have found that later-hatching chicks which successfully reach adulthood produce more chicks than do their earlier-hatching nestmates.
Long flights over water may occasionally be undertaken.
It is a monogamous breeder, but does not pair for life.
It was later seen flying over St Mary's, Isles of Scilly, and arrived in a poor condition in Madeira three days later.
These mites are dispersed by coprophilous beetles, often of the family Scarabaeidae, or on dung brought by the storks during nest construction.
Pairs copulate frequently throughout the month before eggs are laid.
The clattering is amplified by its throat pouch, which acts as a resonator.
White storks consume a wide variety of animal prey.
Several bird species often nest within the large nests of the white stork.
According to European folklore, the stork is responsible for bringing babies to new parents.
''esculentus'') and common frog (''Rana temporaria'') and small mammals such as voles, moles and shrews.
This conspicuous species has given rise to many legends across its range, of which the best-known is the story of babies being brought by storks.
A decline in population began in the 19th century due to industrialisation and changes in agricultural methods.
North of the breeding range, it is a passage migrant or vagrant in Finland, Great Britain, Iceland, Ireland, Norway and Sweden, and west to the Azores and Madeira.
The diet of non-breeding birds is similar to that of breeding birds, but food items are more often taken from dry areas.
Apart from Spain and Portugal (33,217 and 7,684 pairs in 2004/05 respectively), populations are generally much less stable.
There are two subspecies:
The males arrive earlier in the season and choose the nests.
Its plumage is mainly white, with black on its wings.
It is a recognised pathogen and cause of morbidity in the Asian openbill (''Anastomus oscitans'').
They were also associated with handicapped or stillborn babies in Germany, explained as the stork having dropped the baby ''en route'' to the household, or as revenge or punishment for past wrongdoing.
It is the national bird of Lithuania and Belarus, and it was a Polish mascot at the Expo 2000 Fair in Hanover.
The breast feathers are long and shaggy forming a ruff which is used in some courtship displays.
The typical storks include the white stork and six other extant species, which are characterised by straight pointed beaks and mainly black and white plumage.
The legend is very ancient, but was popularised by a 19th-century Hans Christian Andersen story called ''The Storks''.
The white stork's preferred feeding grounds are grassy meadows, farmland and shallow wetlands.
In Denmark, storks were said to toss a nestling off the nest and then an egg in successive years.
They were also protected because of the belief that their souls were human.
Migration through the Middle East may be hampered by the ''khamsin'', winds bringing gusty overcast days unsuitable for flying.
In medieval England, storks were also associated with adultery, possibly inspired by their courtship rituals.
Thus, flocks spiral upwards on rising warm air until they emerge at the top, up to  above the ground (though one record from Western Sudan observed an altitude of ).
Nests are built in loose colonies.
For many, the shortest route would take them over the Mediterranean Sea; however, since air thermals do not form over water, they generally detour over land to avoid the trans-Mediterranean flights that would require prolonged energetic wing flapping.
Other white storks subsequently tested in Israel have shown anti-WNV antibodies.
Conservation and reintroduction programs across Europe have resulted in the white stork resuming breeding in the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland and Sweden.
Although not many storks passed through Rossitten itself, the observatory coordinated the large-scale ringing of the species throughout Germany and elsewhere in Europe.
Common food items include insects (primarily beetles, grasshoppers, locusts and crickets), earthworms, reptiles, amphibians, particularly frog species such as the edible frog (''Pelophylax'' kl.
The white stork also tends to be larger than the yellow-billed stork.
It is slightly larger than the nominate subspecies.
There were 601 pairs breeding in Armenia and around 700 pairs in the Netherlands in 2008, and few pairs also breed in South Africa, typically recent colonists from within the normal wintering population.
Incubation begins as soon as the first egg is laid, so the brood hatches asynchronously, beginning 33 to 34&nbsp;days later.
The white stork was one of the many bird species originally described by Linnaeus in the landmark 1758 10th edition of his ''Systema Naturae'', where it was given the binomial name of ''Ardea ciconia''.
A mother who was confined to bed around the time of childbirth was said to have been "bitten" by the stork.
In parts of Spain, studies have shown that the pigment is based on astaxanthin obtained from an introduced species of crayfish (''Procambarus clarkii'') and the bright red beak colours show up even in nestlings, in contrast to the duller beaks of young white storks elsewhere.
Birds returning to Latvia during spring have been shown to locate their prey, moor frogs (''Rana arvalis''), by homing in on the mating calls produced by aggregations of male frogs.
The white stork is a rare visitor to the British Isles, as about 20 birds are seen in Britain every year, but there are no records of nesting.
In the Iberian Peninsula, populations are concentrated in the southwest, and have also declined due to agricultural practices.
Moulting has not been extensively studied, but appears to take place throughout the year, with the primary flight feathers replaced over the breeding season.
Juvenile white storks were shown to host less species, but the intensity of infection was higher in the juveniles than in the adult storks.
By the time it fledges, the juvenile bird's plumage is similar to that of the adult, though its black feathers are often tinged with brown, and its beak and legs are a duller brownish-red or orange.
Tailwinds and scarcity of food and water en route (birds fly faster over regions lacking resources) increase average speed.
The fungi found on the plumage may feed on the keratin of the outer feathers or on feather oil.
Birds that have been ringed can sometimes be affected by the accumulation of droppings around the ring leading to constriction and leg trauma.
Storks have little fear of humans if not disturbed, and often nest on buildings in Europe.
The flock was stressed as it had resorted to flapping flight to return to its migratory route, and a number of birds died.
From there the folklore has spread around the world to countries such as the Philippines and South America.
This early down is replaced about a week later with a denser coat of woolly white down.
Wintering white storks in India sometimes forage along with the woolly-necked stork (''Ciconia episcopus'').
In fact, Jung recalled being told the story himself upon the birth of his own sister.
The winter range of ''C.
It flies with its neck stretched forward and with its long legs extended well beyond the end of its short tail.
A white stork pair raises a single brood a year.
The white stork breeds in greater numbers in areas with open grasslands, particularly grassy areas which are wet or periodically flooded, and less in areas with taller vegetation cover such as forest and shrubland.
However, birds ringed in Germany have been recovered in western (Bikaner) and southern (Tirunelveli) India.
Its beak is black with a brownish tip.
Like all storks, it has long legs, a long neck and a long straight pointed beak.
In Ancient Egypt, it was associated with, and was the hieroglyph for, the ''Ba'', or "soul".
The reintroduction of zoo-reared birds has halted further declines in Italy, the Netherlands, and Switzerland.
Unlike most storks, it never adopts a spread-winged posture, though it is known to droop its wings (holding them away from its body with the primary feathers pointing downwards) when its plumage is wet.
A large population of white storks breeds in central (Poland, Ukraine and Germany) and southern Europe (Spain and Turkey).
The authors proposed that this was related to climate warming, and the influx of other animals and plants to higher altitudes.
On hatching the chick has pinkish legs, which turn to greyish-black as it ages.
Young birds are fed with earthworms and insects, which are regurgitated by the parents onto the floor of the nest.
The white stork has also been noted for tool use by squeezing moss in the beak to drip water into the mouths of its chicks.
The 24–6 million year old fossil could have originated from either a white stork or a black stork (''C.&nbsp;nigra''), which are species of about the same size with very similar bone structures.
Parasitic mites do not occur, perhaps being controlled by the predatory species.
The bills gain the adults' red colour the following summer, although the black tips persist in some individuals.
A few records of breeding from South Africa have been known since 1933 at Calitzdorp, and about 10 birds have been known to breed since the 1990s around Bredasdorp.
The white stork is a long-distance migrant, wintering in Africa from tropical Sub-Saharan Africa to as far south as South Africa, or on the Indian subcontinent.
Systematic research into migration of white stork began with German ornithologist Johannes Thienemann who commenced ringing studies in 1906 at the Rossitten Bird Observatory, on the Curonian Spit in what was then East Prussia.
The irises are dull brown or grey, and the peri-orbital skin is black.
Between 1906 and the Second World War about 100,000, mainly juvenile, white storks were ringed, with over 2,000 long-distance recoveries of birds wearing Rossitten rings reported between 1908 and 1954.
On 26 August 1998, a flock of about 1,200 migrating white storks that had been blown off course on their southward journey landed in Eilat, in southern Israel.
Long term viability of the population in Switzerland is unclear as breeding success rates are low, and supplementary feeding does not appear to be of benefit.
Birthmarks on the back of the head of newborn baby, ''nevus flammeus nuchae'', are sometimes referred to as stork-bite.
The young leave the nest 58–64&nbsp;days after hatching, and continue to be fed by the parents for a further 7–20&nbsp;days.
White storks exhibit this behaviour exclusively at the nest site.
However, groups among white stork colonies vary widely in size and the social structure is loosely defined; young breeding storks are often restricted to peripheral nests, while older storks attain higher breeding success while occupying the better quality nests toward the centres of breeding colonies.
As with other storks, the wings are long and broad enabling the bird to soar.
This behaviour occurs in times of food shortage to reduce brood size and hence increase the chance of survival of the remaining nestlings.
Not only do their bodies tend to regulate temperatures within the nest, but excrement, food remains and feather and skin fragments provide nourishment for a large and diverse population of free-living mesostigmatic mites.
There, they spend the winter in savannah from Kenya and Uganda south to the Cape Province of South Africa.
Used in a variety of social interactions, bill-clattering generally grows louder the longer it lasts, and takes on distinctive rhythms depending on the situation—for example, slower during copulation and briefer when given as an alarm call.
Chewing lice such as ''Colpocephalum zebra'' tend to be found on the wings, and ''Neophilopterus incompletus'' elsewhere on the body.
These migration corridors maximise help from the thermals and thus save energy.
By comparison, the autumn journey is completed in about 26 days.
In parts of Poland, poor natural foraging grounds have forced birds to seek food at rubbish dumps since 1999.
Storks were also thought to care for their aged parents, feeding them and even transporting them, and children's books depicted them as a model of filial values.
White storks generally begin breeding when about four years old, although the age of first breeding has been recorded as early as two years and as late as seven years.
It walks at a slow and steady pace with its neck upstretched.
The birds themselves host species belonging to more than four genera of feather mites.
The eggs are white, but often look dirty or yellowish due to a glutinous covering.
The temperature and weather around the time of hatching in spring is important; cool temperatures and wet weather increase chick mortality and reduce breeding success rates.
They prefer to forage in meadows that are within roughly 5&nbsp;km (3&nbsp;mi) of their nest and sites where the vegetation is shorter so that their prey is more accessible.
More recently, the thorough study performed by J. Sitko and P. Heneberg in the Czech Republic in 1962–2013 suggested that the central European white storks host 11 helminth species.
A white stork's droppings, containing faeces and urine, are sometimes directed onto its own legs, making them appear white.
The beak is typically orange or red with a darker tip.
It has a length of , and a standing height of .
In Poland, electric poles have been modified with a platform at the top to prevent the white stork's large nest from disrupting the electricity supply, and sometimes nests are moved from an electric pole to a man-made platform.
The '''white stork''' (''Ciconia ciconia'') is a large bird in the stork family Ciconiidae.
A pair nested atop St Giles High Kirk in Edinburgh, Scotland in 1416.
Pelicans also behave differently, soaring in orderly, synchronised flocks rather than in disorganised groups of individuals as the white stork does.
The smaller dark-plumaged Abdim's stork is often encountered with white stork flocks in southern Africa.
There were negative aspects to stork folklore as well; a Polish folk tale relates how God made the stork's plumage white, while the Devil gave it black wings, imbuing it with both good and evil impulses.
The white stork has been rated as least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).
These caves contained ''adebarsteine'' or "stork stones".
White storks rely on the uplift of air thermals to soar and glide the long distances of their annual migrations between Europe and Sub-Saharan Africa.
A carnivore, the white stork eats a wide range of animal prey, including insects, fish, amphibians, reptiles, small mammals and small birds.
These mites, including ''Freyanopterolichus pelargicus'' and ''Pelargolichus didactylus'' live on fungi growing on the feathers.
It benefited from human activities during the Middle Ages as woodland was cleared, but changes in farming methods and industrialisation saw it decline and disappear from parts of Europe in the 19th and early 20th centuries.
The bird is featured in at least three of Aesop's Fables: The Fox and the Stork, The Farmer and the Stork, and The Frogs Who Desired a King.
The stork family contains six genera in three broad groups: the open-billed and wood storks (''Mycteria'' and ''Anastomus''), the giant storks (''Ephippiorhynchus'', ''Jabiru'' and ''Leptoptilos''), and the "typical" storks, ''Ciconia''.
c. ciconia'', the nominate subspecies described by Linnaeus in 1758, breeds from Europe to northwest Africa and westernmost Asia, and in southern Africa, and winters mainly in Africa south of the Sahara Desert, though some birds winter in India.
Non-breeding birds gather in groups of 40 or 50 during the breeding season.
The Hebrew word for the white stork is ''chasidah'' (חסידה), meaning "merciful" or "kind".
The female typically lays four eggs, though clutches of one to seven have been recorded.
The first accurate census in 1917 found 25 pairs and the last pair failed to breed around 1955.
They make use of grasslands, wetlands, and farmland on the wintering grounds in Africa.
In 2008 three juvenile white storks from a Polish wildlife refuge yielded seropositive results indicating exposure to the virus, but the context or existence of the virus in Poland is unclear.
Juvenile white storks set off on their first southward migration in an inherited direction but, if displaced from that bearing by weather conditions, they are unable to compensate, and may end up in a new wintering location.
A study of 120 white stork carcasses from Saxony-Anhalt and Brandenburg in Germany yielded eight species of trematode (fluke), four cestode (tapeworm) species, and at least three species of nematode.
The other species found included ''Cathaemasia hians'', ''Echinochasmus spinulosus'', ''Echinostoma revolutum'', ''Echinostoma sudanense'', ''Duboisia syriaca'', ''Apharyngostrigea cornu'', ''Capillaria sp.''
In Slavic mythology and religion, storks were thought to carry unborn souls from Iriy to Earth in spring and summer.
The white stork is a popular motif on postage stamps, and it is featured on more than 120 stamps issued by more than 60 stamp-issuing entities.
Each nest is  in depth,  in diameter, and  in weight.
The child-bringing myth has appeared in different forms in history.
When migrating between Europe and Africa, it avoids crossing the Mediterranean Sea and detours via the Levant in the east or the Strait of Gibraltar in the west, because the air thermals on which it depends do not form over water.
These feed on the eggs and larvae of insects and on nematodes, which are abundant in the nest litter.
The length of the beak increases linearly for about 50&nbsp;days.
c. asiatica'' overlaps that of the Asian openbill, which has similar plumage but a different bill shape.
The eastern route is by far the more important with 530,000 white storks using it annually, making the species the second commonest migrant there (after the European honey buzzard).
That island is 500&nbsp;km (320&nbsp;mi) from Africa, and twice as far from the European mainland.
The Danish population declined to just three pairs in 2005.
The fable and its relation to the internal world of the child have been discussed by Sigmund Freud, and Carl Jung.
In flapping flight its wingbeats are slow and regular.
White stork nestlings do not attack each other, and their parents' method of feeding them (disgorging large amounts of food at once) means that stronger siblings cannot outcompete weaker ones for food directly, hence parental infanticide is an efficient way of reducing brood size.
A ''Ciconia'' fossil representing the distal end of a right humerus has been recovered from Miocene beds of Rusinga Island, Lake Victoria, Kenya.
Adults can compensate for strong winds and adjust their direction to finish at their normal winter sites, because they are familiar with the location.
Upon hatching, the young white stork is partly covered with short, sparse, whitish down feathers.
Birds have long been associated with the maternal symbols from pagan goddesses such as Juno to the Holy Ghost, and the stork may have been chosen for its white plumage (depicting purity), size (in that it is big enough to carry an infant), and flight at high altitude (likened to flying between Earth and Heaven).
Nesting over successive years, the storks bring more material to line their nests and layers of organic material accumulate within them.
About 5000 pairs were estimated to breed in the 18th century which declined subsequently.
The eastern route is twice as long as the western, but storks take the same time to reach the wintering grounds by either.
The Middle Miocene beds of Maboko Island have yielded further remains.
Social structure and group cohesion is maintained by altruistic behaviours such as allopreening.
Introductions of zoo-reared birds in the Netherlands has been followed up by feeding and nest-building programs by volunteers.
The ''asiatica'' population of about 1450 birds is restricted to a region in central Asia between the Aral Sea and Xinjiang in western China.
Migrating birds appear to be important in spread of the virus, the ecology of which remains poorly known.
Adults have long red legs and long pointed red beaks, and measure on average  from beak tip to end of tail, with a  wingspan.
Paired birds greet by engaging in up-down and head-shaking crouch displays, and clattering the beak while throwing back the head.
A small population of white storks winters in India and is thought to derive principally from the ''C.&nbsp;c.&nbsp;asiatica'' population as flocks of up to 200 birds have been observed on spring migration in the early 1900s through the Kurram Valley.
For the same reason, all spring migrants, even those from displaced wintering locations, can find their way back to the traditional breeding sites.
The wingspan is  and its weight is .
In Germany, the majority of the total 4,482 pairs were in the eastern region, especially in the states of Brandenburg and Mecklenburg-Vorpommern (1296 and 863 pairs in 2008 respectively).
Due to its large size, predation on vermin, and nesting behaviour close to human settlements and on rooftops, the white stork has an imposing presence that has influenced human culture and folklore.
In a 2004/05 census, there were 52,500 pairs in Poland, 30,000 pairs in Ukraine, 20,000 pairs in Belarus, 13,000 pairs in Lithuania (the highest known density of this species in the world), 10,700 pairs in Latvia, and 10,200 in Russia.
The display is used as a greeting between birds, post coitus, and also as a threat display.
Psychoanalyst Marvin Margolis suggests the enduring nature of the stork fable of the newborn is linked to its addressing a psychological need, in that it allays the discomfort of discussing sex and procreation with children.
A young white stork ringed at the nest in Denmark subsequently appeared in England, where it spent some days before moving on.
The ''up-down display'' is used for a number of interactions with other members of the species.
By three weeks, the young bird acquires black scapulars and flight feathers.
Migration routes extend the range of this species into many parts of Africa and India.
The Latin word survives in most Romance languages (''cicogna'', ''cigüeña'', ''cegonha'' and the like).
While stronger chicks are not aggressive towards weaker siblings, as is the case in some species, weak or small chicks are sometimes killed by their parents.
Less commonly, they also eat bird eggs and young birds, fish, molluscs, crustaceans and scorpions.
Its closest relatives are the larger, black-billed Oriental white stork (''Ciconia boyciana'') of East Asia, which was formerly classified as a subspecies of the white stork, and the maguari stork (''C.&nbsp;maguari'') of South America.
The babies would then be given to the mother or dropped down the chimney.
White storks were probably aided by human activities during the Middle Ages as woodland was cleared and new pastures and farmland were created, and they were found across much of Europe, breeding as far north as Sweden.
Breeding pairs of white stork may gather in small groups to hunt, and colony nesting has been recorded in some areas.
