Gelatin is also used to flocculate the suspended tannins extracted by the press.
A third way is electrodialysis: an electric current between two plates attracts the wine ions and eliminates them.
At the same time, the Spanish had just completed their ''Reconquista'' and replaced the Mediterranean wine with its own, especially for English and Dutch consumers.
White wines have to conquer hostile territories where red wine dominates such as the Rocky Mountains or Canada.
It is produced by the alcoholic fermentation of the non-colored pulp of grapes which may have a white or black skin.
After the end of fermentation, the wine may also have malolactic fermentation or FML.
In France the dose is limited to 150&nbsp;mg/litre for Vin de Pays (country wines), 185&nbsp;mg/l for Sparkling wines, 200&nbsp;mg/l for Fortified wines, 200&nbsp;mg/l for dry white wines, 250&nbsp;mg/l for white wines with residual sugar greater than 5 g/litre (Moelleux wines), and 300&nbsp;mg/l for liquoreux sweet wines.
It also encouraged them to seek new wild varieties adaptable to these distant areas where the Mediterranean varieties showed their limits.
Some producers who sell their own products directly to the consumer, explain these natural phenomena to the customer who then serve the wine gently in order to prevent the crystals forming in the bottom of the bottle.
The coupe is also used in mixtures which have an olive in a bubbly cocktail and in the spectacular pyramids of glasses that crown festivities.
Their variable quantity varies the pH of the wort.
They came from grapes that dominated the vineyards of Languedoc-Roussillon and Spain.
However, for some sweet wines, a successful harvest requires manual work and training for pickers to pick only clusters where the berries have reached optimum ripeness or have been affected by noble rot (for the ''Sélection de Grains Nobles'').
Knowledge about the culture of grapevines was conserved by the Catholic Church: wine was necessary for the celebration of Mass and the monks planted vines at high latitudes and increased the monastic acreages.
This process separates them as it happens and uses them to measure the progress of the "vintage", the first and second ''tailles'', and finally the ''rebêches'' of insufficient quality to be made into AOC wine.
The seeds are hard and are 2 to 5% by weight of the berry.
The grape berry is made of skin, flesh (or pulp), and seeds.
It has accompanied economic development and colonized every country whose inhabitants are wine drinkers: Europe, America, Oceania, although less systematically in Africa and Asia due to climate and religious reasons.
Pre-fermentation Maceration is generally performed at a controlled temperature to delay the onset of fermentation.
Made famous by the champagne used to christen large ships at launch, sparkling white wine is produced in almost all wine-producing countries and has become a benchmark for providing a festive and commemorative spirit to an event.
* the '''traditional method''' which was once called '''méthode champenoise''' consists of vinifying white or rosé wine as for a still wine.
The occupation of Champagne by Russian troops in 1815 publicized the sparkling wine to the Russian aristocracy.
In recent studies white wine was found to present more significant cardiovascular benefits than red wine.
The progress of the glass industry (especially from the use of coal) helped to democratize the use of the glass bottle.
The cooked pressed cheeses require a bold wine, woodland.
Wine merchants failed to survive the fall of the Western Roman Empire and viticulture declined dramatically.
"Jumping, dancing, touring - and drinking white wine and rose - and do nothing every day - What counts as crowns of the sun" - François Rabelais
A ''liqueur de tirage'' (sugar) is then added to the wine and bottled.
determine the amount of each wine to mix together in the final blend to obtain optimum quality.
The practice of shaking or stalking has the advantage of separating the stems from the cluster of grapes and avoids giving the wine a herbaceous taste at pressing.
File:Aged white wine with brown color.jpg|Aged white wine (Madeira).
This oxygen helps to polymerize the components of the wine making it less aggressive and more balanced.
Who gilds the cotiau of nout campaign
File:W0467-Muscadet_2_JusDePresse_15249.JPG|Step 2: grape juice.
In the case of white winemaking the wort is simply the grape juice from the pressing of grape berries.
And all your sacred champagne wines
In addition, white wines are also produced on land  with a limestone sub-soil such as the chalky base of the Champagne wine region or the limestone under siliceous marl of Chassagne-Montrachet form the backdrop to some of the most prestigious wines in world.
Its acidity balances well with fat taking away excess heaviness.
It was used to produce ''acachul'' a drink sweetened with fruit and honey.
File:Pet20091027.jpg|PET is a neutral packaging for wine.
In red grapes the film also contains anthocyanins or coloured matter which is from bright to purplish red.
The seeds contain 25-45% water, 34-36% carbohydrates, 13-20% fat (the grape seed oil), 4-6% tannins, 4-6.5% protein, 2-4% minerals, and 1% fatty acids.
File:Bonnaire Grand Cru Blanc de Blancs 2004.jpg|Bottle of sparkling wine with its characteristic covering.
When the transport time between vine and winery is long, the harvest can be refrigerated and kept away from oxygen using nitrogen or dry ice.
Very fashionable in Australia and New Zealand, this technique seeks highly aromatic white wines and is very interesting on aromatic varieties such as Sauvignon B, Colombard B, and Riesling B, although less so for varieties such as Chardonnay B.
It is a wine very difficult to develop because the balance of the wine is based on only two parameters: acidity and alcohol.
Rich Roman patricians organized banquets where the cost of the food was a sign of prestige.
File:Vin Jaune.jpg|A bottle of yellow wine from Jura: (a ''clavelin'').
However, it can also be marked by olfactory defects, such as the smell of fungus on spoiled grapes or the vegetable smell of a harvest with insufficient maturity.
When wine production was introduced on the banks of the Charente in the 17th century, Charente white wines were introduced as cognac.
However, studies in California have shown the beneficial effect of wine at a low daily dose for non-alcoholic cirrhosis and this effect was not seen with other alcoholic beverages such as beer or liquor, studies will be conducted in the 2010s to determine which components of the wine are responsible for this effect.
It can help to express the characteristics of a variety or a method of manufacture.
In winemaking blending is always empirical, it cannot be predicted that the combination of two or more vintages will give the expected product.
The Americas have developed both white and red wines, some of which are now recognized worldwide.
From the 16th century the first European vines were planted in America: in Mexico, then Peru, Bolivia, Argentina, and Chile.
During the fermentation of the grapes varietal aromas are reduced in favour of an increase in roundness and volume in the mouth of the wine during ageing in oak barrels.
More or less aromatic and tangy, it is derived from the complete fermentation of the wort.
It was not until 120 years later that a method of very late harvest was experimented with on the steep banks of the Rhine.
"Seek me without delay the friend who treats and cures the madness with me and has never betrayed me.
She also has cinematic posterity with ''The Extraordinary Adventures of Adèle Blanc-Sec''.
All choices are allowed even if the sweet and fortified wines are more suitable for this.
The term most commonly cited is yellow.
This disease can occur from a regular consumption of 20 grams per day for women and 40 grams per day for men.
The role of white wine is similar to that of lemon juice used under the same conditions: once verjuice also fulfilled this function.
For large volume tanks the control of temperature, which typically is around 18&nbsp;°C, becomes necessary.
These fermentation tanks can be of several types: oak, cement coated with epoxy, stainless or enamelled steel, or epoxy resin.
Tannic acid (or gallotannic) C76-H52-O46 is used for the clarification of white wine, using casein, gelatin, or Isinglass.
It is a protection in the wort against the oxidation phenomenon.
Some varieties are particularly sensitive to pinking: Sauvignon B, Viognier, Grenache B...
This wine niche is now intended for export to Northern Europe, a region that consumes a high proportion of white wine.
In Burgundy these practices may face the phenomenon of premature oxidation.
This alcohol can be responsible for cirrhosis.
Vitamin B1 or thiamine is present at a concentration between 0.2 and 0.5 milligrams per litre.
The ''aminum'' or ancient grape produced a sweet white wine produced as mulled wine resembling modern-day Madeira.
Finally the study of the addition of cellulose gum or carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) conducted in recent years led to its approval in 2009 (EC Regulation 606/2009).
The centrifuge removes the largest particles but does not achieve a high level of clarity.
Some varieties are naturally high in protein (muscat.
The Germanic countries benefited from the navigability of the Rhine and the Danube so they could export their production.
"I come to the wedding of my sister Annette
File:Gewurztraminer Alsace4.jpg|A bottle from Alsace: (a flûte).
It is filtered before being returned to the bottle
The flavours are much less present than in the skin.
The stalk (or ''rafle'') is the herbaceous branch that bears the grapes.
The wide variety of white wines comes from the large number of varieties, methods of winemaking, and also the ratio of residual sugar.
This solution is the least expensive for energy and refrigeration equipment and does not alter the aromatic perception of wine.
In the south the Saracens were making ''Ghazw'' or raids.
* the '''rural method''' or '''craft method''' for a wine in which the fermentation was stopped by cold (in the past it was the arrival of winter blocking fermentation).
So many glasses, specific to white wine, exist in many wine producing regions.
The fortified and sparkling wines support rich desserts made with cream or butter.
In addition, the flavour will be less fresh and less vivid.
During the Enlightenment, Voltaire and Casanova celebrated wine parties, drunk at fine tables.
The vinegar combines acidity with a burning sensation that gives recipes where it is used a bittersweet side characteristic.
The first is to cool the wine to a negative temperature near freezing for several weeks.
There are many other acids in small quantities: citric acid, ascorbic acid, α-ketoglutaric, fumaric acid, galacturonic acid, coumaric acid, etc.
The feeling of freedom infused into the German winemakers under French occupation during the First Empire prevented the aristocracy and the clergy from recovering all the vineyards from which they were dispossessed.
The majority of wine components are dissolved in the wine: certain components, however, may take an insoluble form during ageing or storage of wine - this is the case with tartaric acid.
Since 1962 the addition of vitamin C in the wine has been allowed to a maximum of 15 grams per hectolitre at the time of packaging to stabilize the wine.
For these, when their solubility threshold is reached, they settle and contribute to de-acidify the wort.
Some varieties are well-known such as the Chardonnay, Sauvignon, and Riesling.
The wine must be chilled but not be served with ice.
After fermentation all wine requires constant care to be fit for consumption.
White wine is an acidic beverage with a pH ranging from 2.8 to 3.6.
Many different sugars coexist: the most common are glucose and fructose which will be consumed by anaerobic yeast to convert it to alcohol during fermentation.
This is the case especially in some white champagne wines partly made from black grapes and reminiscent of red fruit (strawberry, raspberry, blueberry, gooseberry, etc.
Serious or tinged with humour white wine is present in all kinds of works, novels, poetry, and philosophy itself.
However, the effect is not sustainable in the long term (between 6 and 18 months) because it hydrolyzes when warm.
In the production of a white wine, the stalk does not contain any useful part: its moisture can cause dilution and the presence of tannins is not desirable in the wine.
For sale to individuals or restaurants the wine is filtered if necessary, then conditioned.
File:Vin Jaune.jpg|Yellow wine, Comté cheese, and nuts.
The process followed at this stage will largely determine the future quality of the wine.
The industrial revolution enriched a bourgeoisie clientele for the best wines and the rural exodus to the factories created a large market for mass-produced wines.
Even some varieties are mentioned in song such as the song entitled ''Sauvignon'' by Hubert Lapaire in 1926:
During alcoholic fermentation of all wines yeast produces carbon dioxide so during fermentation all wines are sparkling.
From the 13th century traders distinguished ''vinum hunicum'' (wine of the Huns), which was drunk by the people, from ''vinum francium'' (Wine of the Franks) which was the wine for the wealthy aristocracy.
For a sweet wine, fermentation is stopped before its end to keep some of the sugar: this is the ''Mutage'' (fortification).
The flesh of the grape is the most important part - it is between 75 and 85% of the weight of the grape.
It is often used to recover clear wort in the lees exiting the centrifuge.
In the "maceration of lees", the lees from the static settling are gathered in a refrigerated tank and agitated for several days.
Little dry white wine was produced for export from La Rochelle while Bordeaux exported mainly wines from the hinterland received via the Garonne.
The blending or not of the ''moût de goutte'' and the ''moût de presse'' musts and release depends on the health of the grapes, the method of pressing, and the style of wine intended.
This acidity is an aggressive element to tooth enamel.
Many countries have adopted this shape for bottles of white wine - a more streamlined form than red wine bottles.
This mode of production happened in Europe at the same time as new techniques of treatment of the must (accelerated settling, use of selected yeasts, addition of glues and yeast enzymes, the practice of maceration).
The majority of aromatic components (acetates of alcohol and ethyl esters of fatty acids) are synthesized by the yeast during fermentation of light juice below 18&nbsp;°C.
The fermentation can be stopped by adding Sulphur Dioxide (SO2) (sterilisation of wine), by sudden cooling (anaesthesia of yeasts), by sterile filtration (capturing the yeasts in a very fine mesh filter), or a combination of several of these methods.
I have the heart guil'ret, the pleasing air
As an example, Chardonnay combines well with the taste of ''fleur de lis'' (triple cream cheese).
"From this fresh wine the sparkling foam
After the wort is clarified it is decanted for fermenting.
A choice of sparkling wine also allows the retention of the same wine from the beginning to the end of the meal.
There has also been a decrease in growing areas in the last thirty years.
The duration (typically 5 to 18 hours at 18&nbsp;°C) depends on the variety, the temperature of maceration, the maturity of the grape, and the quality of the soil.
This is the method developed by the producers of Gaillac AOC and Blanquette de Limoux
In 1453 the Ottoman Empire took Constantinople and the situation of the Venetians and Genovese deteriorated.
In the case of a harvest with a very clear wort and low temperature the yeast works in a limited way and the addition of thiamine can help avoid a difficult end of fermentation.
The remaining sugar finishes fermenting in the bottle producing dissolved gas.
The flesh of the grape contains mainly water.
Potassium and also calcium can form salts with the tartaric acid: Potassium bitartrate and the neutral calcium tartrate at the pH of the wine.
More than other wines, white wine is a wine that can be consumed between meals.
The ''moût de presse'' (Must of the Press) is the juice flowing from the press from the pressure on the grapes.
The wine is then usually decanted to eliminate the lees.
* the '''Dioise method''': after fermentation using the standard rural method, the wine is filtered in a vat similar to the transfer method
Packaging is the operation to put the wine in the container in which it will be marketed.
I feel flageoler I feel my legsM
A salt containing potassium, potassium bitartrate is in the form of crystals at the bottom of the bottle.
The skin contains a lot of cellulose, insoluble pectin and proteins, and organic acids: citric, malic, and tartaric acids.
Since the 1930s and with the habit to consume drier sparkling wines, the flute has taken the place of the coupe.
In California and Australia the need to cool the grapes and wine during fermentation led winemakers to equip their cellars with adequate equipment: refrigeration units, circuits of pipes to carry the liquid refrigerant, and vats  temperature-regulated by coils in the walls of the vessel or flag (a thin welded coil shaped like a flat plate with a high heat exchange capability).
Fortified white wines are recommended with foie gras.
In southern areas the acidity is carefully preserved to give the wine its liveliness for refreshing Aroma of wine.
In the range of expensive products wine played a predominant role.
Sweet wines either just sweet or fortified are a good option for exotic dishes with sweet spices (dishes with cinnamon, vanilla etc.).
The winemaker can also use a variety with a coloured skin provided one is careful not to stain the wort during the separation of the pulp-juice.
The maximum allowable doses depend on the sugar content of the wine: the residual sugar is susceptible to attack by microorganisms which would cause a restart of fermentation.
The wine was drunk cool in summer and warm in winter a practice which still continues in the 21st century.
I know I drank ... of the excellent white burgundy" - Casanova
The trade was re-established initially after the enrichment of the nobles and prelates because, as with the Romans, the art of the table reflected the reputation of the host.
File:Fondue p1150668.jpg|Swiss Cheese Fondue.
Turbidity of the must ensures a good supply of yeasts and fermentation in small tanks or in barrels then does not require mastery of cold.
However, the richness of vocabulary leaves free space for visual analysis between the actual colour and the hue (the range of colour is often different at the joint between the wine and the glass).
The tablets of Hattusa describes wine with the term ''wiyana'' in the Hittite language, GEŠTIN in Sumerian, and ''karânu'' in Akkadian.
The winemaker can choose to use a commercially available active dry yeast.
Epigraphy tells us about the presence of wine in the Middle East: it was produced in the "High Country" (the mountain borders between Anatolia and Armenia) and then imported into Mesopotamia especially from the 3rd millennium BC.
Celebrated by writers, poets, singers and painters, white wine is used as an ''Apéritif'' during the meal, with dessert, or as a refreshing drink between meals.
For a sweet white wine, whether fortified or natural, sugar is the key criterion.
Prized by the House of Habsburg, Tokay experienced profitable trading.
The trampled and de-stemmed harvest is then pressed.
Closer to home Boris Vian celebrated "Muscadet in green glasses, a fresh wine, What cheers" in his song ''Mechanical Music''.
White wine also contributes to the development of dishes in the kitchen thanks to its acidity, aroma, and its ability to soften meat and deglaze the cooking juices.
the white wine'' by Jean Dréjac and Charles Borel-Clerc.
White wines may also convey floral aromas of acacia, honeysuckle, verbena, violet, etc.. (Scents of honey can also be assimilated).
File:Glass of Cava.jpg|A flûte of cava.
It consists of large polygonal cells which are very thin-walled.
These are responsible for the aroma of the grape and for the molecules that become the aroma of wine during fermentation: they are the "aroma precursors".
For our French it is a brilliant image" - Voltaire
Difficult to transport and store, wine long remained a product for local consumption.
Symptoms such as difficulty breathing, migraine, or stomach heat sensation may indicate an intolerance.
They are in substantially equal amounts.
File:Wine bottle Provence.jpg|A bottle from Provence: (a flûte with corset, or flute provençale, or flute quille).
"Vinous white wine" and "bitter white wine" were used among his remedies - a sign of diversity in production at that time.
In addition it contains alcohol which is expressed in degrees or percentage.
Sparkling wines are served in particular glasses such as the flute and the coupe.
Barrel ageing creates scents of vanilla, butter, brioche, toast, caramel, etc.
''A touch of champagne'' is a song by Harry Fragson written about 1890.
Fortified wines are recommended with veined cheeses (Blue or Roquefort).
Sparkling wines can be taken at any time during the meal, their diversity allows this.
Tokay, Sherry, and Sauternes are examples of these.
File:Choucroute-p1030190.jpg|Alsatian sauerkraut.
and I pinched my little tuft.
Once back home, the rulers and wealthy aristocrats looking to buy the sweet wines they enjoyed in the East.
The drippings of cooking juices is also a role that white wine can be used in; made with a sweet white wine and giving a sour-sweet or sweet-salt sauce.
The winemaker can soak the skins of white grapes and practice maceration if the quality of the grapes is good.
Besides this range of glasses, the work of a team of tasters, including Jules Chauvet of the INAO in France, led to the creation in 1970 of the ''INAO glass''.
In contrast some producers grow their vines organically or biodynamically: the lees are of good quality without synthetic chemicals harmful to yeast so they are kept in the wine.
The decline of viticulture was intensified when Vikings cut the sea lanes in the Atlantic.
File:Hautes Côtes de Beaune blanc 2006 Domaine Billard.jpg|A bottle of Bourgogne: (a bourguignonne).
The fruity aromas include citrus fruit such as lemon and grapefruit, white fruit such as apple, quince, peach and apricot, and nuts such as walnut and hazelnut.
Often associated with a bitter taste, their removal is generally beneficial for white wine.
The interruption of the fermentation by a cold winter led to the discovery of the process of secondary fermentation of champagne.
File:Gaillacoise.jpg|Bottles from Gaillac: (some gaillacoises).
