A white flag has long been used to represent either surrender or a request for a truce.
During the Middle Ages, painters rarely ever mixed colors; but in the Renaissance, the influential humanist and scholar Leon Battista Alberti encouraged artists to add white to their colors to make them lighter, brighter, and to add ''hilaritas'', or gaiety.
The widows of the kings of France wore white until Anne of Brittany in the 16th century.
The Pope wears white as a symbol of innocence and sacrifice.
It reverses the colors of the Black Standard, the flag of Muhammad.
A common expression in English is "pale as a ghost."
It was a symbol of purity, chastity and grace, which could only be captured by a virgin.
The colors come from the flag of the Arab Revolt in 1916.
Because of its brilliant whiteness, it is used as a colorant for most toothpaste and sunscreen.
They seemed to be alive, filled with curves, asymmetry, mirrors, gilding, statuary and reliefs, unified by white.
White also represented death in ancient Egypt, representing the lifeless desert that covered much of the country; black was held to be the color of life, representing the mud-covered fertile lands created by the flooding of the Nile and giving the country its name (''Kemet'', or "black land").
Until 1972 agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation were required to wear white shirts with their suits, to project the correct image of the FBI.
It was used in its simplest form by the Russian suprematist painter Kazimir Malevich in his 1917 painting 'the white square,' the companion to his earlier 'black square.'
It was often portrayed in the lap of the Virgin Mary.
Black and white also appealed to modernist architects, such as Le Corbusier (1887–1965).
Shadows of other clouds above can make clouds look gray, and some clouds have their own shadow on the bottom of the cloud.
File:Flag of the Netherlands.svg|The flag of the Netherlands (1572) was the first red, white and blue national flag.
Men in the aristocracy and upper classes wore powdered white wigs and white stockings, and women wore elaborate embroidered white and pastel gowns.
In ancient Egypt and ancient Rome, priestesses wore white as a symbol of purity, and Romans wore a white toga as a symbol of citizenship.
It was the first white pigment used by prehistoric artists in cave paintings.
File:Leonardo da Vinci - Portrait of Cecilia Gallerani (Lady with an Ermine) - WGA12698.jpg|''Lady with an ermine'', by Leonardo da Vinci (1490).
White has long been the traditional color worn by brides at royal weddings, but the white wedding gown for ordinary people appeared in the 19th century.
File:Palacio do Planalto.jpeg|The Palácio do Planalto in Brasília, official workplace of the President of Brazil (1960)
White is the color most associated with '''cleanliness'''.
Beaches with sand containing high amounts of quartz or eroded limestone also appear white, since quartz and limestone reflect or scatter sunlight, rather than absorbing it.
File:Flag of the Philippines.svg| The Flag of the Philippines use royal blue, scarlet, yellow, and white.
Tropical white sand beaches may also have a high quantity of white calcium carbonate from tiny bits of seashells ground to fine sand by the action of the waves.
In the temples of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church or also known as Mormon), White clothing is worn inside once they have been officially dedicated, due to white symbolizing purity.
Monks of the Order of Saint Benedict dressed in the white or gray of natural undyed wool, but later changed to black, the color of humility and penitence.
Bleaching agents that do not contain chlorine most often are based on peroxides, such as hydrogen peroxide, sodium percarbonate and sodium perborate.
Bleaching is a process for whitening fabrics which has been practiced for thousands of years.
White stone became the material of choice for government buildings in Washington D.C. and other American cities.
Ihram is typically worn during Dhu al-Hijjah, the last month in the Islamic calendar.
The same principle is used in photography and cinematography where the choice of white point determines a transformation of all other color stimuli.
File:Large white spread wings.jpg|A cabbage butterfly (''Pieris brassicae'').
Names taken from white include Alba, Albine (Latin).
The white flag was officially recognized as a request to cease hostilities by the Geneva Convention of 1949.
It was replaced in the 19th century by zinc white and titanium white.
In many Asian cultures, white is also the color of mourning.
File:BasilikaOttobeurenHauptschiff02.JPG|A highly theatrical white Rococo interior from the 18th century, at the Basilica at Ottobeuren, in Bavaria.
File:Apparition DB.JPG|The woman in white or dame blanche is a familiar figure in English, French and German ghost stories.
It was unthinkable to have sheets or underwear of any other color.
Sirius B, a white dwarf, is the faint pinprick of light to the lower left of the much brighter Sirius A.
File:858MilanoDuomo.JPG|The Cathedral of Milan (1386–1965)
Tropical white sand beaches may also have a high quantity of white calcium carbonate from tiny bits of seashells ground to fine sand by the action of the waves.
Church interiors were designed to show the power, glory and wealth of the church.
His painting "Symphony in White No.
In the Bedouin and some other pastoral cultures, there is a strong connection between milk and white, which is considered the color of gratitude, esteem, joy, good fortune and fertility.
It became the color worn by priests during Mass, the color worn by monks of the Cistercian Order, and, under Pope Pius V, a former monk of the Dominican Order, it became the official color worn by the pope himself.
File:Sacre-coeur-paris.jpg| Basilica of Sacré-Cœur, Paris (1919)
Blanche and Blanchette (French); Bianca (Italian); Jennifer (Celt); Genevieve, Candice (from Latin Candida); Fenela, Fiona and Finola (Irish); Gwendoline, Gwenael, Nol(g)wen (''white woman'') (Celt), Nives (Italian) and Zuria (Basque).
The text says, "Son, go save the motherland!"
In the 18th century several scientists developed varieties of chlorine bleach, including  sodium hypochlorite and calcium hypochlorite (bleaching powder).
Some detergents go one step further; they contain fluorescent chemicals which glow, making the fabric look literally whiter than white.
Philippines also use white as their symbol for unity in their flag.
White is also the color most often worn by chefs, bakers, and butchers, and the color of the aprons of waiters in French restaurants.
White represents "light, the path of truth".
Beaches with sand containing high amounts of quartz or eroded limestone also appear white, since quartz and limestone reflect or scatter sunlight, rather than absorbing it.
She is a spectral apparition of a female clad in white, in most cases the ghost of an ancestor, sometimes giving warning about death and disaster.
This light will however have very few practical applications since color rendering of objects will be greatly distorted.
It is the color of purity, divinity, detachment and serenity.
Chalk is a kind of limestone, made of the mineral calcite, or calcium carbonate.
In the Middle Ages and Renaissance, white was commonly worn by widows as a color of mourning.
In China and other Asian counties, white is the color of reincarnation,  showing that death is not a permanent separation from the world.
A white dwarf is a stellar remnant composed mostly of electron-degenerate matter.
In the Book of Revelation, the last book in the New Testament of the Bible, the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse are supposed to announce the Apocalypse before the Last Judgement.
People of the Caucasian race, most commonly those of European descent, are often referred to simply as white.
On the screen of a color television or computer, white is produced by mixing the primary colors of light: red, green and blue (RGB) at full intensity, a process called additive mixing (see image below).
The 19th-century American painter James McNeill Whistler (1834–1903), working at the same time as the French impressionists, created a series of paintings with musical titles where he used color to create moods, the way composers used music.
The pots in turn were piled on shelves close to cow dung.
It was then made into cakes and dried in the sun.
The top (the ''riḍā'') is draped over the torso and the bottom (the ''izār'') is secured by a belt; plus a pair of sandals.
according to different interpretations, represents either War and Conquest, the Antichrist, or Christ himself, cleansing the world of sin.
Objects which are expected to be clean, such as refrigerators and dishes, toilets and sinks,  bed linen and towels, are traditionally white.
The white lamb was the center of one of the most famous paintings of the Medieval period, the Ghent Altarpiece by Jan van Eyck.
The Pope, the head of the Roman Catholic Church, has worn white since 1566, as a symbol of purity and sacrifice.
In Judaism, during the rituals of Yom Kippur, the ceremony of atonement, the rabbi dresses in white, as do the members of the congregation, to restore the bonds between God and his followers.
The ancient Greeks saw the world in terms of darkness and light, so white was a fundamental color.
This has led to the notion that white light can be defined as a mixture of "all colors" or "all visible wavelengths".
High energy photons of light, often in the violet or ultraviolet range, can disrupt the bonds in the chromophore, rendering the resulting substance colorless.
File:Chief Vestal.jpg|Statue of the chief Vestal Virgin, wearing a white palla and a white veil.
At the end of the 19th century, lead white was still the most popular pigment; but between 1916 and 1918, chemical companies in Norway and the United States began to produce titanium white, made from titanium oxide.
Snow is a mixture of air and tiny ice crystals.
It includes people who reported “White” or wrote in entries such as Irish, German, Italian, Lebanese, Near Easterner, Arab, or Polish."
Titanium white is the most popular white for artists today; it is the brightest available white pigment, and has twice the coverage of lead white.
It was also widely used in 20th century modern architecture as a symbol of modernity, simplicity and strength.
White symbolized their purity, loyalty, and chastity.
Popes occasionally wore white in the Middle Ages, but usually wore red.
A white kimono is often placed in the casket with the deceased for the journey to the other world, as white represents death sometimes.
Its faint luminosity comes from the emission of stored thermal energy.
These places were dedicated to the ''kami'', spirits which had descended from the heavens or had come across the sea.
File:JapaneseFuneralEnvelope.jpg|In Japan, the traditional envelope for condolence gifts is wrapped in a black and white cord,  and a white kimono is often placed in the coffin with the deceased.
This phenomenon is not limited to western culture; in Yoruba religion, the orisha Obatala in the Ifá tradition is represented by white.
While most bleaches are oxidizing agents, a fewer number are reducing agents such as sodium dithionite.
In the past the dead were traditionally buried in a white shroud.
This the unicorn hunt from the Rochester Bestiary, from about 1230, in the British Library.
The Ku Klux Klan is a racist and anti-immigrant organization which flourished in the Southern United States after the American Civil War.
The white unicorn was a common subject of Medieval and Renaissance manuscripts, paintings and tapestries.
A white tunic was also worn by many knights, along with a red cloak, which showed the knights were willing to give their blood for the king or Church.
In the time of the Emperor Augustus, no Roman man was allowed to appear in the Roman forum without a toga.
In the mountains, pilgrims wear costumes of undyed jute to symbolize purity.
He said a house was "a machine for living in" and called for a "calm and powerful architecture" built of reinforced concrete and steel, without any ornament or frills.
File:Ägyptischer Maler um 1360 v. Chr.
File:Den Haag stadhuis april 2004.JPG|The City Hall in The Hague, Netherlands, by architect Richard Meier (2004).
Japanese has six different words, depending upon brilliance or dullness, or if the color is inert or dynamic.
File:Flag of Taliban.svg|The flag of the Taliban in Afghanistan from 1997-2001.
Pieces of lead were put into clay pots which had a separate compartment filled with vinegar.
File:Sirius A and B Hubble photo.jpg|Image of Sirius A and Sirius B taken by the Hubble Space Telescope.
In many cultures white represents or signifies purity, innocence, and light, and is the symbolic opposite of black, or darkness.
Eggs, another symbol of the new, are used to celebrate Easter.
File:За единую Россію.jpg|Poster for the White Army during the Russian Civil War (1917–22).
It first became commercially available in 1921.
Many mountains with winter or year-round snow cover are named accordingly: Mauna Kea means ''white mountain'' in Hawaiian, Mont Blanc means ''white mountain'' in French.
It is similar to chalk, made of calcium carbonate with calcium hydroxide.
In Medieval art, the white lamb became the symbol of the sacrifice of Christ on behalf of mankind.
The dresses were high in fashion but low in warmth considering the more severe weather conditions of northern France; in 1814 the former wife of Napoleon, Joséphine de Beauharnais, caught  pneumonia and died after taking a walk in the cold night air with Tsar Alexander I of Russia.
In ancient Rome, the priestesses of the goddess Vesta dressed in white linen robes, a white palla or shawl, and a white veil.
The early Christian church adopted the Roman symbolism of white as the color of purity, sacrifice and virtue.
File:Flag of the Vatican City.svg|The Flag of Vatican City (1929).
Almost all the buildings of contemporary architect Richard Meier, such as his museum in Rome to house the ancient Roman Ara Pacis, or Altar of Peace, are stark white, in the tradition of Le Corbusier.
Zinc white is made from zinc oxide.
(The State ''Hermitage Museum'').
The Latin word ''candere'' meant to shine, to be bright.
In China, white is associated with the masculine (the ''yang'' of the ''yin'' and ''yang''); with the unicorn and tiger; with the fur of an animal; with the direction of west; with the element metal;  and with the autumn season.
In Greek mythology, the chief god Zeus was nourished at the breast of the nymph Amalthea.
A white dwarf is very hot when it is formed, but since it has no source of energy, it will gradually radiate away its energy and cool down.
The white ribbon is worn by movements denouncing violence against women and the White Rose was a non-violent resistance group in Nazi Germany.
Many religions symbolize heaven by using a sky with white clouds.
Peter the Great adopted the colors for the flag of Russia.
This misconception is widespread and might originally stem from the fact that Newton discovered that ''sunlight'' is composed of light with wavelengths across the visible spectrum.
In Western culture, white is the color most often associated with innocence.
File:Pope Francis in March 2013.jpg|Pope Francis (2013).
File:MontBlanc2c.jpg|Mont Blanc in the Alps.
File:Flag of Ireland.svg|The flag of Ireland.
The Renaissance architect and scholar Leon Battista Alberti wrote in 1452 that churches should be plastered white on the inside, since white was the only appropriate color for reflection and meditation.
The text says 'There is no God but Allah, and Muhammad is his prophet."
Over a very long time, a white dwarf will cool to temperatures at which it will no longer emit significant heat or light, and it will become a cold ''black dwarf''.
Chinese white is a variety of zinc white made for artists.
File:VillaSavoye.jpg|The Villa Savoye (1928–31) by Le Corbusier.
File:Yin and Yang.svg|In Taoism, white represents the ''yang'' or male energy, one of the two complementary natures of the universe.
In nature,  snow and clouds appear white because they are composed of water droplets or ice crystals mixed with air; when white sunlight enters snow, very little of the spectrum is absorbed; almost all of the light is reflected or scattered by the air and water molecules, so the snow appears to be the color of sunlight, white.
White was the dominant color of architectural interiors in the Baroque period and especially the Rococo style that followed it in the 18th century.
White is also connected with the paleness of death.
The Queen of the United Kingdom traditionally wears white when she opens the session of Parliament.
The Parthenon and other ancient temples of Greece, and the buildings of the Roman forum  were mostly made of or clad in white marble, though it is now known that some of these ancient buildings were actually brightly painted.
Within the hierarchy of the church, the lighter the color, the higher the rank.
Some non-European languages have a wide variety of terms for white.
White became the banner of the royalist rebellions against the French Revolution (see Revolt in the Vendée).
Sometimes the light bounces around inside the ice crystals before being scattered, making the snow seem to sparkle.
White was the traditional color of the coats of doctors, nurses,  scientists and laboratory technicians, though nowadays a pale blue or green is often used.
The absoluteness of white appealed to modernist painters.
White is an important color for almost all world religions.
File:Paintings from the Chauvet cave (museum replica).jpg|Prehistoric paintings in Chauvet Cave, France (30,000 to 32,000 BC)
As sunlight enters the ice, more light of the red spectrum is absorbed, so the light scattered will be bluish.
It is made out of titanium dioxide, from the minerals brookite, anatase, rutile, or ilmenite, currently the major source.
(1801), by François Gérard.
White is worn by priests at Christmas, during Easter, and during celebrations connected with the other events of the life of Christ, such as Corpus Christi Sunday, and Trinity Sunday.
Conquest, with a bow, rides a white horse.
File:Cumulus clouds in fair weather.jpeg|Cumulus clouds look white because the water droplets reflect and scatter the sunlight without absorbing other colors.
The first five Presidents of the United States wore dark suits with powdered wigs for formal occasions.
File:Weisse tara mongolian art.jpg|The Buddhist deity Tara is often depicted with white skin.
Magistrates and certain priests wore a ''toga praetexta'', with a broad purple stripe.
File:Toufuku-ji kaizandou3.JPG|The zen garden of Tōfuku-ji temple in Japan.
File:Snow-covered fir trees.jpg|Snow is composed of ice and air; it scatters or reflects sunlight without absorbing other colors of the spectrum.
An oxidizing bleach works by breaking the chemical bonds that make up the chromophore.
The most notable Weiße Frau is the legendary ghost of the German Hohenzollern dynasty.
Artists such as Fra Angelico used their greatest skill to capture the whiteness of his garments.
In the case of glaciers, the ice is more tightly pressed together and contains little air.
It was also used by the Dutch modernist painter Piet Mondrian.
File:Marie-Antoinette par Elisabeth Vigée-Lebrun - 1783.jpg|White gown of Marie Antoinette, painted by Elisabeth Vigée-Lebrun in 1783.
Seeing a white horse in a dream is said to be presentiment of death.
In Biblical times, lambs and other white animals were sacrificed to expiate sins.
In Islam, and in the Shinto religion of  Japan,  it is worn by pilgrims;  and by the Brahmins in India.
A plain white toga, known as a ''toga virilis'',  was worn for ceremonial occasions by all Roman citizens over the age of 14–18.
The Gospel of Saint Mark describes Jesus' clothing in this event as "shining, exceeding white as snow."
In Christianity, children are baptized wearing white, and, wear white for their first communion.
In the Roman Catholic Church, white is associated with Jesus Christ, innocence and sacrifice.
Ordinary priests wear black; bishops wear violet, cardinals wear red, and outside a church, only the Pope will wear white.
File:Pensacola Beach 1957 White Sand.jpg|Pensacola Beach, Florida.
According to Pliny the Elder in his ''Natural History'', Apelles (4th century BC) and the other famous painters of ancient Greece used only four colors in their paintings; white, red, yellow and black; For painting, the Greeks used lead white, made by a long and laborious process.
In India, the color white was traditionally reserved for the Brahmin caste.
Clouds are white for the same reason as ice.
White is one of the most common colors in nature, the color of sunlight, snow, milk, chalk, limestone and other common minerals.
The poster says: "for a United Russia."
In his painting of the transfiguration at the Convent of Saint Mark in Florence, Fra Angelico emphasized the white garment by using a light gold background, placed in an almond-shaped halo.
File:Wedding kimono.jpg|Brides in China and other parts of Asia traditionally wear red, the color of happiness and good fortune, but in the Shinto religion of Japan brides traditionally wear a white wedding kimono.
In Greece and other ancient civilizations, white was often associated with mother's milk.
White was the universal color of both men and women's underwear and of sheets in the 18th and 19th centuries.
In the Talmud, milk was one of four sacred substances, along with wine, honey, and the rose.
The ermine symbolized nobility and purity.
File:Maler der Grabkammer des Thot 001.jpg|Paintings of women in white from a tomb (1448–1422 BC).
This eliminates the ability of the chromophore to absorb visible light.
White light can be fabricated using light with only two wavelengths, for instance by mixing light from a red and cyan laser or yellow and blue lasers.
File:Zinc oxide.jpg|Zinc white, made from zinc oxide.
Christ after his Resurrection is traditionally portrayed dressed in white.
It takes its name from the white snow on its summit.
White is the color of the Dominican Order.
The white lace wedding gown of Queen Victoria in 1840 had a large impact on the color and fashion of wedding dresses in both Europe and America down to the present day.
File:Kazimir_Malevich_-_%27Suprematist_Composition-_White_on_White%27,_oil_on_canvas,_1918,_Museum_of_Modern_Art.jpg|''White on White'' (1917) by Kazimir Malevich, Museum of Modern Art, New York
It was originally deposited under the sea as the scales or plates of tiny micro-organisms called Coccolithophore.
