Decades of poor maintenance, the construction of a fourth story attic during the Coolidge administration, and the addition of a second-floor balcony over the south portico for Harry S. Truman took a great toll on the brick and sandstone structure built around a timber frame.
Several other Georgian-era Irish country houses have been suggested as sources of inspiration for the overall floor plan, details like the bow-fronted south front, and interior details like the former niches in the present Blue Room.
Italian artisans, brought to Washington to help in constructing the U.S. Capitol, carved the decorative stonework on both porticos.
A myth emerged that during the rebuilding of the structure after the Burning of Washington, white paint was applied to mask the burn damage it had suffered, giving the building its namesake hue.
Adams lived in the house only briefly before Thomas Jefferson moved into the "pleasant country residence" in 1801.
During the mid-to-late 19th century a series of ever larger greenhouses were built on the west side of the house, where the current West Wing is located.
Since the Kennedy restoration, every presidential family has made some changes to the private quarters of the White House, but the Committee for the Preservation of the White House must approve any modifications to the State Rooms.
As it is a famed structure in America, several replicas of the White House have been constructed.
As part of a futile effort to have Philadelphia named the permanent national capital, Pennsylvania built a much grander presidential mansion several blocks away, but Washington declined to occupy it.
Built to be the permanent presidential mansion, neither Washington nor Adams would occupy it.
The bunker has come to be known as the Presidential Emergency Operations Center.
The July 1790 Residence Act named Philadelphia, Pennsylvania the temporary national capital for a 10-year period while the Federal City was under construction.
Occupied by Adams: March 1797 – May 1800.
File:White House, Blue Sky.jpg|The White House with fountain and grounds.
The Pennsylvania Avenue closing has been opposed by organized civic groups in Washington, D.C.
By the time of the American Civil War, the White House had become overcrowded.
The location of the White House was questioned, just north of a canal and swampy lands, which provided conditions ripe for malaria and other unhealthy conditions.
Jefferson also permitted public tours of his house, which have continued ever since, except during wartime, and began the tradition of annual receptions on New Year's Day and on the Fourth of July.
East Wing alterations were completed in 1946, creating additional office space.
Her husband created the modern press briefing room over Franklin Roosevelt's old swimming pool.
Construction of the White House began with the laying of the cornerstone on October 13, 1792, although there was no formal ceremony.
The finished structure contained only two main floors instead of the planned three, and a less costly brick served as a lining for the stone façades.
Construction continued with the addition of the semi-circular South portico in 1824 and the North portico  in 1829.
The White House reopened to the public in November 2013.
The wallpaper had hung previously on the walls of another mansion until 1961 when that house was demolished for a grocery store.
The windows of the four bays flanking the portico, at first-floor level, have alternating pointed and segmented pediments, while at second-floor level the pediments are flat.
The Panic of 1873 had led to an economic depression that persisted through much of the decade.
The Trumans moved back into the White House on March 27, 1952.
He proposed abandoning the use of the White House as a residence and designed a new estate for the first family at Meridian Hill in Washington, D.C., but Congress rejected the plan.
It allowed easy wheelchair access for the public tours and special events that enter through the secure entrance building on the east side.
The south portico was constructed in 1824 during the James Monroe administration; the north portico was built six years later.
File:House intended for the President Birch's Views Plate 13.jpg|'''House intended for the President''', Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (1790s).
In the 1990s, Bill and Hillary Clinton refurbished some rooms with the assistance of Arkansas decorator Kaki Hockersmith, including the Oval Office, the East Room, Blue Room, State Dining Room, Lincoln Bedroom, and Lincoln Sitting Room.
Stéphane Boudin of the House of Jansen, a Paris interior-design firm that had been recognized worldwide, was employed by Mrs. Kennedy to assist with the decoration.
Meanwhile, both architect Benjamin Henry Latrobe and Hoban contributed to the design and oversight of the reconstruction, which lasted from 1815 until 1817.
The sandstone walls were erected by Scottish immigrants, employed by Hoban, as were the high-relief rose and garland decorations above the north entrance and the "fish scale" pattern beneath the pediments of the window hoods.
Today, Jefferson's colonnades link the residence with the East and West Wings.
File:WhSouthLawn.JPEG|Marine One prepares for landing on the South Lawn where State Arrival Ceremonies for visiting heads of state take place
Some modifications to the floor plan were made, the largest being the repositioning of the grand staircase to open into the Entrance Hall, rather than the Cross Hall.
A newly constructed East Wing was used as a reception area for social events; Jefferson's colonnades connected the new wings.
He is reputed to have met with Hoban then.
Despite his complaints that the house was too big ("big enough for two emperors, one pope, and the grand lama in the bargain"), Jefferson considered how the White House might be added to.
The building was originally referred to variously as the "President's Palace", "Presidential Mansion", or "President's House".
File:White House 1846.jpg|Earliest known photograph of the White House, taken c. 1846 by John Plumbe during the administration of James K. Polk.
Occupied by Washington: February - August 1790.
The theoretical link between the two houses has been criticized because Hoban did not visit France.
Built to be the permanent presidential mansion, Congress moved the national capital to Philadelphia before its completion.
The Statue of Liberty project was not the only undertaking that had difficulty raising money: construction of the obelisk later known as the Washington Monument sometimes stalled for years.
File:Aerial view of the White House.jpg|Overhead view of the White House grounds
President John Adams also occupied the Market Street mansion from March 1797 to May 1800.
It also includes the Cabinet Room, where the president conducts business meetings and where the Cabinet meets, as well as the White House Situation Room, James S. Brady Press Briefing Room, and Roosevelt Room.
By 1948, the house was declared to be in imminent danger of collapse, forcing President Truman to commission a reconstruction and to live across the street at Blair House from 1949-51.
File:1122-WAS-The White House.JPG|White House from the north
In the Diplomatic Reception Room Mrs. Kennedy installed an antique "Vue de l'Amérique Nord" wall paper which Zuber & Cie had designed in 1834.
Once this work was completed, the interior rooms were rebuilt.
The work, done by the firm of Philadelphia contractor John McShain, required the complete dismantling of the interior spaces, construction of a new load-bearing internal steel frame and the reconstruction of the original rooms within the new structure.
A plan was devised by Colonel Theodore A. Bingham, which reflected the Harrison proposal.
The White House became one of the first wheelchair-accessible government buildings in Washington when modifications were made during the presidency of Franklin D. Roosevelt, who used a wheelchair because of his paralytic illness.
During this period, the North Lawn was planted with ornate carpet-style flowerbeds.
Brigadier General Nathaniel Michler was tasked to propose solutions to address these concerns.
Those receptions ended in the early 1930s, although President Bill Clinton would briefly revive the New Year's Day open house in his first term.
During the Nixon administration (1969–74), First Lady Pat Nixon refurbished the Green Room, Blue Room, and Red Room, working with Clement Conger, the curator appointed by President Richard Nixon.
The West Wing was damaged by fire in 1929, but rebuilt during the remaining years of the Herbert Hoover presidency.
The name "Executive Mansion" was used in official contexts until President Theodore Roosevelt established the formal name by having "White House–Washington" engraved on the stationery in 1901.
Hoban's competition drawings do not survive.
Michelle Obama planted the White House's first organic garden and installed beehives on the South Lawn of the White House, which will supply organic produce and honey to the First Family and for state dinners and other official gatherings.
Today the group of buildings housing the presidency is known as the White House Complex.
Under Harry S. Truman, the interior rooms were completely dismantled and a new internal load-bearing steel frame constructed inside the walls.
These plans were ultimately rejected.
The ground floor is rusticated in the Palladian fashion.
The first president occupied the Market Street mansion from November 1790 to March 1797, and altered it in ways that may have influenced the design of the White House.
It receives up to 30,000 visitors each week.
File:US $20 Series 2006 Reverse.jpg|White House on the reverse (back) of the U.S. $20 note.
For the North Portico, a variation on the Ionic Order was devised incorporating a swag of roses between the volutes.
File:PhiladelphiaPresidentsHouse.jpg|'''Third Presidential Mansion:''' President's House, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Charged with maintaining the historical integrity of the White House, the congressionally authorized committee works with each First Family—usually represented by the First Lady, the White House Curator, and the Chief Usher—to implement the family's proposals for altering the house.
The ground floor is hidden by a raised carriage ramp and parapet, thus the façade appears to be of two floors.
Over twenty wagonloads of furniture and household items were removed from the building and sold at a public auction.
Out of respect for the historic character of the White House, no substantive architectural changes have been made to the house since the Truman renovation.
The central three bays are behind a prostyle portico (this was a later addition to the house, built circa 1830) serving, thanks to the carriage ramp, as a porte cochere.
Contrary to speculation, the North Portico was not modeled on a similar portico on another Dublin building, the Viceregal Lodge (now ''Áras an Uachtaráin'', residence of the President of Ireland), for its portico postdates the White House porticos' design.
These tours were suspended in the wake of the September 11 attacks.
167 solar photovoltaic grid tied panels were installed at the same time on the roof of the maintenance facility.
Nixon also added a single-lane bowling alley to the White House basement.
Mrs. Nixon's efforts brought more than 600 artifacts to the house, the largest acquisition by any administration.
The third floor consists of the White House Solarium, Game Room, Linen Room, a Diet Kitchen, and another sitting room (previously used as President George W. Bush's workout room).
Charles McKim himself designed and managed the project, which gave more living space to the President's large family by removing a staircase in the West Hall and moving executive office staff from the second floor of the residence into the new West Wing.
President Washington visited Charleston, South Carolina in May 1791 on his "Southern Tour", and saw the under-construction Charleston County Courthouse designed by Irish architect James Hoban.
The building Hoban designed is verifiably influenced by the upper floors of Leinster House, in Dublin, which later became the seat of the Oireachtas (the Irish parliament).
In 1814, during the War of 1812, the mansion was set ablaze by the British Army in the Burning of Washington, destroying the interior and charring much of the exterior.
The principal entrance at the center of the portico is surmounted by a lunette fanlight.
The second floor family residence includes the Yellow Oval Room, East and West Sitting Halls, the White House Master Bedroom, President's Dining Room, the Treaty Room, Lincoln Bedroom and Queens' Bedroom, as well as two additional bedrooms, a smaller kitchen, and a private dressing room.
Bordering the East Colonnade is the Jacqueline Kennedy Garden, which was begun by Jacqueline Kennedy but completed after her husband's assassination.
File:The First Presidential Mansion.jpg|'''First Presidential Mansion:''' Samuel Osgood House, Manhattan, New York.
The State Floor of the residence building includes the East Room, Green Room, Blue Room, Red Room, State Dining Room, Family Dining Room, Cross Hall, Entrance Hall, and Grand Staircase.
Antique furniture was acquired, and decorative fabric and trim based on period documents was produced and installed.
A fifty-foot jeweled Tiffany glass screen, supported by imitation marble columns, replaced the glass doors that separated the main corridor from the north vestibule.
After the fire, President James Madison resided in The Octagon House from 1814 to 1815, and then the Seven Buildings from 1815 to the end of his term.
Prior to its inclusion within the fenced compound that now includes the Old Executive Office Building to the west and the Treasury Building to the east, this sidewalk served as a queuing area for the daily public tours of the White House.
The initial construction took place over a period of eight years, at a reported cost of $232,371.83 (equal to $ today).
A Carter-era innovation, a set of solar water heating panels that were mounted on the roof of the White House, was removed during Reagan's presidency.
On his recommendation, the house was changed from three stories to two, and was widened from a nine-bay facade to an 11-bay facade.
Although it was not completed until some years after the presidency of George Washington, it is also speculated that the name of the traditional residence of the President of the United States may have derived from Martha Washington's home, White House Plantation in Virginia, where the nation's first President had courted the First Lady in the mid-18th century.
The more modern third floor is hidden by a balustraded parapet and plays no part in the composition of the façade.
In 2007, work was completed on renovations of the press briefing room, adding fiber optic cables and LCD screens for the display of charts and graphs.
These units are used to heat water for landscape maintenance personnel and for the presidential pool and spa.
President Thomas Jefferson held an open house for his second inaugural in 1805, and many of the people at his swearing-in ceremony at the Capitol followed him home, where he greeted them in the Blue Room.
The modern-day White House complex includes the Executive Residence, West Wing, East Wing, the Eisenhower Executive Office Building—the former State Department, which now houses offices for the President's staff and the Vice President—and Blair House, a guest residence.
The bow has a ground floor double staircase leading to an Ionic colonnaded loggia (with the Truman Balcony at second-floor level), known as the south portico.
During the Kennedy administration, the White House Rose Garden was redesigned by Rachel Lambert Mellon.
This portion of the building was used as the setting for the popular television show ''The West Wing''.
Occupied by Washington: April 1789 - February 1790.
Computers and the first laser printer were added during the Carter administration, and the use of computer technology was expanded during the Reagan administration.
By 1948, the house's load-bearing exterior walls and internal wood beams were found to be close to failure.
Franklin D. Roosevelt had Adams's blessing carved into the mantel in the State Dining Room.
The building has classical inspiration sources, that could be found directly or indirectly in the Roman architect Vitruvius or in Andrea Palladio styles; Palladio being an Italian architect of the Renaissance which had a considerable influence on the Western architecture (Palladian architecture).
Although not yet completed, the White House was ready for occupancy circa November 1, 1800.
As a result of increased security regarding air traffic in the capital, the White House was evacuated in May 2005 before an unauthorized aircraft could approach the grounds.
The Rose Garden borders the West Colonnade.
The total cost of the renovations was about $5.7 million (US$  million in ).
When Chester Arthur took office in 1881, he ordered renovations to the White House to take place as soon as the recently widowed Lucretia Garfield moved out.
The term ''White House'' is often used to refer to actions of the president and his advisers, as in "The White House announced that...".
File:White-house-floor2-yellow-oval-room.jpg|Yellow Oval Room in the private, second-floor family residence centered directly above the Blue Room.
The White House remained accessible in other ways; President Abraham Lincoln complained that he was constantly beleaguered by job seekers waiting to ask him for political appointments or other favors, or eccentric dispensers of advice like "General" Daniel Pratt, as he began the business day.
The first White House guidebook was produced under the direction of curator Lorraine Waxman Pearce with direct supervision from Mrs. Kennedy.
In the fall of 1882 work was done on the main corridor, including tinting the walls pale olive and adding squares of gold leaf, and decorating the ceiling in gold and silver, and colorful traceries woven to spell "USA".
Above the entrance is a sculpted floral festoon.
Jefferson also drafted a planting plan for the North Lawn that included large trees that would have mostly obscured the house from Pennsylvania Avenue.
The Kennedy restoration resulted in a more authentic White House of grander stature, which recalled the French taste of Madison and Monroe.
In the 1990s, Hillary Clinton, at the suggestion of Visitors Office Director Melinda N. Bates, approved the addition of a ramp in the East Wing corridor.
These influences, though undocumented, are cited in the official White House guide, and in White House Historical Association publications.
Construction on the French house was initially started before 1789, interrupted by the French Revolution for twenty years and then finally built 1812–1817 (based on Salat's pre-1789 design).
Redecorations were made to the private family quarters and maintenance was made to public areas during the Reagan years.
She enlisted the help of Henry Francis du Pont of the Winterthur Museum to assist in collecting artifacts for the mansion, many of which had once been housed there.
An elliptical portico at Château de Rastignac in La Bachellerie, France with nearly identical curved stairs is speculated as the source of inspiration due to its similarity with the South Portico, although this matter is one of great debate.
The City of Philadelphia rented Robert Morris's city house at 190 High Street (now 524-30 Market Street) for Washington's presidential residence.
The Ground Floor is made up of the Diplomatic Reception Room, Map Room, China Room, Vermeil Room, Library, the main kitchen, and other offices.
File:White-House.jpg|Jefferson and Latrobe's West Wing Colonnade in this nineteenth-century engraved view, is now the James S. Brady Press Briefing Room.
Supporters of a connection posit that Thomas Jefferson, during his tour of Bordeaux in 1789, viewed Salat's architectural drawings (which were on-file at the College) at the École Spéciale d'Architecture (Bordeaux Architectural College).
White House tours were suspended for most of 2013 due to budget constraints after sequestration.
In the 1930s, a second story was added, as well as a larger basement for White House staff, and President Franklin Roosevelt had the Oval Office moved to its present location: adjacent to the Rose Garden.
The first official White House guide, published in 1962, suggested a link between Hoban's design for the South Portico and Château de Rastignac, a neoclassical country house located in La Bachellerie in the Dordogne region of France and designed by Mathurin Salat.
On his return to the U.S. he then shared the influence with Washington, Hoban, Monroe, and Benjamin Henry Latrobe.
The mansion's southern façade is a combination of the Palladian and neoclassical styles of architecture.
Shortages, including material and labor, forced alterations to the earlier plan developed by French engineer Pierre Charles L'Enfant for a "palace" that was five times larger than the house that was eventually built.
The Red Room was painted a dull Pomeranian red, and its ceiling was decorated with gold, silver, and copper stars and stripes of red, white, and blue.
In the 1950s, President Dwight D. Eisenhower was the first president to travel by helicopter to and from the White House grounds.
President Truman had the original timber frame sawed into paneling; the walls of the Vermeil Room, Library, China Room, and Map Room on the ground floor of the main residence were paneled in wood from the timbers.
Just before the demolition, the wallpaper was salvaged and sold to the White House.
File:The President's House by George Munger, 1814-1815 - Crop.jpg|The White House as it looked following the conflagration of August 24, 1814
Kennedy showed her restoration of the White House to the public in a televised tour of the house on Valentine's Day in 1962.
Reconstruction began almost immediately, and President James Monroe moved into the partially reconstructed Executive Residence in October 1817.
This was done to link the new portico with the earlier carved roses above the entrance.
During Adams' second day in the house, he wrote a letter to his wife Abigail, containing a prayer for the house.
Even so, the practice continued until 1885, when newly elected Grover Cleveland arranged for a presidential review of the troops from a grandstand in front of the White House instead of the traditional open house.
It has been the residence of every U.S. president since John Adams in 1800.
The property is a National Heritage Site owned by the National Park Service and is part of the President's Park.
In September 2003, they resumed on a limited basis for groups making prior arrangements through their Congressional representatives or embassies in Washington for foreign nationals and submitting to background checks, but the White House remained closed to the public.
The White House and grounds cover just over 18 acres (about 7.3 hectares).
File:Latrobe White House cropa2.jpg|Principal story plan for the white house by Benjamin Henry Latrobe, 1807.
The White House includes: six stories and 55,000&nbsp;ft² (5,100 m²) of floor space, 132 rooms and 35 bathrooms, 412 doors, 147 windows, twenty-eight fireplaces, eight staircases, three elevators, five full-time chefs, a tennis court, a (single-lane) bowling alley (officially called the Harry S. Truman Bowling Alley), a movie theater (officially called the White House Family Theater), a jogging track, a swimming pool, and a putting green.
When Thomas Jefferson moved into the house in 1801, he (with architect Benjamin Henry Latrobe) added low colonnades on each wing that concealed stables and storage.
When construction was finished, the porous sandstone walls were whitewashed with a mixture of lime, rice glue, casein, and lead, giving the house its familiar color and name.
The East Wing was built during World War II in order to hide the construction of an underground bunker to be used in emergencies.
Occupied by Washington: November 1790 – March 1797.
On the weekend of June 23, 2006, a century-old American Elm (''Ulmus americana'' L.) tree on the north side of the building, came down during one of the many storms amid intense flooding.
The bow is flanked by 5 bays, the windows of which, as on the north façade, have alternating segmented and pointed pediments at first-floor level.
The Executive Residence is made up of six stories—the Ground Floor, State Floor, Second Floor, and Third Floor, as well as a two-story basement.
Among the oldest trees on the grounds are several magnolias (''Magnolia grandiflora'') planted by Andrew Jackson.
File:The Government House, New York 1650665.jpg|'''Government House, New York''' (1790-91).
Much of the other work on the house was performed by immigrants, many not yet with citizenship.
Although the White House grounds have had many gardeners through their history, the general design, still largely used as master plan today, was designed in 1935 by Frederick Law Olmsted, Jr. of the Olmsted Brothers firm, under commission from President Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Only the exterior walls remained, and they had to be torn down and mostly reconstructed because of weakening from the fire and subsequent exposure to the elements, except for portions of the south wall.
Though Latrobe proposed similar porticos before the fire in 1814, both porticos were built as designed by Hoban.
The Chief Usher coordinates day to day household operations.
The national capital moved to Philadelphia in December 1790.
Of the numerous objects taken from the White House when it was ransacked by British troops, only two have been recovered.
The roofline is hidden by a balustraded parapet.
The President's House in Philadelphia became a hotel and was demolished in 1832, while the unused presidential mansion became home to the University of Pennsylvania.
The earliest evidence of the public calling it the "White House" was recorded in 1811.
Rosalynn Carter, in 1977, was the first to place her personal office in the East Wing and to formally call it the "Office of the First Lady".
However, in 1902 Theodore Roosevelt hired McKim, Mead & White to carry out expansions and renovations in a neoclassical style suited to the building's architecture, removing the Tiffany screen and all Victorian additions.
The current letterhead wording and arrangement "The White House" with the word "Washington" centered beneath goes back to the administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt.
While the house's structure was kept intact by the Truman reconstruction, much of the new interior finishes were generic, and of little historic value.
The West Wing houses the President's office (the Oval Office) and offices of his senior staff, with room for about 50 employees.
Washington was not entirely pleased with the original submission, however; he found it too small, lacking ornament, and not monumental enough to house the nation's president.
The Executive Residence houses the president's dwelling, as well as rooms for ceremonies and official entertaining.
Lincoln put up with the annoyance rather than risk alienating some associate or friend of a powerful politician or opinion maker.
Other antiques, fine paintings, and improvements of the Kennedy period were donated to the White House by wealthy philanthropists, including the Crowninshield family, Jane Engelhard, Jayne Wrightsman, and the Oppenheimer family.
On July 16, 1792, the President met with the commissioners of the federal city to make his judgment in the architectural competition.
The following year, he summoned the architect to Philadelphia and met with him in June 1792.
The main residence, as well as foundations of the house, were built largely by enslaved and free African-American laborers, as well as employed Europeans.
Eight years later, President William Howard Taft expanded the West Wing and created the first Oval Office which was eventually moved as the section was expanded.
Following his April 1789 inauguration, President George Washington occupied two executive mansions in New York City: the Samuel Osgood House at 3 Cherry Street (April 1789&nbsp;– February 1790), and the Alexander Macomb House at 39–41 Broadway (February–August 1790).
The president usually travels to and from the White House grounds via official motorcade or helicopter.
Because of crowding within the executive mansion itself, President Theodore Roosevelt had all work offices relocated to the newly constructed West Wing in 1901.
The principal façade of the White House, the north front, is of three floors and eleven bays.
Like the English and Irish country houses it was modeled on, the White House was, from the start, open to the public until the early part of the 20th century.
In 2013 President Barack Obama installed a set of solar panels on the roof of the White House.
On Saturday, November 1, 1800, John Adams became the first president to take residence in the building.
