In the 1995 Employment Equity Act, '"members of visible minorities" means persons, other than Aboriginal peoples, who are non-Caucasian in race or non-white in colour'.
An additional 86.3% of the population were mestizo, having mixed indigenous and European ancestry.
However, after the mass exodus resulting from the Cuban Revolution in 1959, the number of white Cubans actually residing in Cuba diminished.
These ideas were discredited by twentieth-century scientists.
By the 18th century, ''white'' had become well established as a racial term.
Nevertheless, light-skinned mulattoes and mestizos with Caucasian features were also historically deemed as more closely related to the ''branco'' Middle Easterner and European descendants' group than the ''pardo'' "grayish-skinned"  multiracial one by a sort of unique social constructs, especially among those multiracials with non-Portuguese European ancestry, and such change of identities actually can mean more of a westernization of the concept of race in Brazil (mixed ancestry, as explained below, is not a factor against in historical definitions of whiteness in Brazil) than a change in the self-esteem of "marginalized and unconscious multiracial populations trying to paint themselves as white in a hopeful attempt to deny their unprivileged person of color status", as common sense among some Brazilians and foreigners is used to state.
Legal scholar John Tehranian argues that in reality this was a "performance-based" standard, relating to religious practices, education, intermarriage and a community's role in the United States.
A separate census question on "cultural or ethnic origin" (question 17) does not refer to skin color.
Syrians, Palestinians, and Lebanese continued since then to settle in Colombia.
Below are some census definitions of white, which may differ from the social definition of white within the same country.
The Basques liked Chile because of its great similarity to their native land: similar geography, cool climate, and the presence of fruits, seafood, and wine.
Before the Industrial Revolutions in Europe whiteness may have been associated with social status.
Blacks and Indians were subject to tribute obligations and forbidden to bear arms, and Black and Indian women were forbidden to wear jewels, silk, or precious metals in early colonial Mexico and Peru.
The Egyptians are depicted as a light reddish brown, the Nubians (modern Sudan) as black skinned, the Semites from the Levant (modern Syria) and Canaan (modern Lebanon, Israel and Jordan) as light skinned, and the Berbers of ancient Libya as similarly fair.
These are the Egyptians, the Levantine/Canaanite peoples or "Asiatics",  the "Nubians" and the "fair-skinned Libyans".
Description of populations as "white" in reference to their skin color predates this notion and is found in Greco-Roman ethnography and other ancient sources.
They consist of 3.6 percent of the population of Belize have their own schools, churches and financial institutions in their various communities.
The ''one drop rule''–that a person with any amount of known African ancestry (however small or invisible) is not white–is a classification that was used in parts of the United States.
Over 700,000 Chileans may have British (English, Scottish or Welsh) origin, 4.5% of Chile's population.
Argentina is home to the fifth largest Ashkenazi Jewish community in the world.
In 1973, all immigration restrictions based on race and/or geographic origin were officially terminated.
Chile is home to a large population of immigrants, mostly Christian, from the Levant.
Blumenbach is known for arguing that physical characteristics like skin color, cranial profile, etc., were correlated with group character and aptitude.
Many Native Americans were also killed by armed conflicts with European settlers.
Beddoe especially postulated that the Welsh and Irish people are closer to the Cro-Magnon, whom he also considered ''Africanoid'', and it was common to find references to the swarthyness of the skin of peoples from the west of the islands, by comparison to the more pale skinned and blond English residing in the east.
During the 19th century, when the British Empire was at its peak, many of the bourgeoisie and aristocracy developed extremely chauvinistic attitudes to those of lower social rank.
In a 1775 work, ''Von den verschiedenen Rassen der Menschen'' ("Of About The Different Races of Humans"), German philosopher Immanuel Kant used the term ''weiß'' (white) to refer to "the white one race of northern Europe" (p.&nbsp;267).
A report from the Pew Research Center in 2008 projects that by 2050, Non-Hispanic white Americans will make up 47% of the population, down from 67% projected in 2005.
Western studies of race and ethnicity in the 18th and 19th centuries developed into what would later be termed scientific racism.
However, it is undeniable that immigrants have played a major role in Chilean society.
However, at its height, the total immigrant population in Mexico never exceeded twenty percent of the total.
In 2009, Costa Rica had an estimated population of 4,509,290.
Robert P. Stuckert, member of the Department of Sociology and Anthropology at Ohio State University said that the majority of the descendants of African slaves are white.
She argues that in ignoring their European ancestry, African Americans are denying their fully articulated multi-racial identities.
Between 1960 and 1990, the census questionnaire in Puerto Rico did not ask about race or color.
Early appearances of white race or white people in the Oxford English Dictionary begin in the seventeenth century.
Irene Silverblatt traces "race thinking" in South America to the social categories of colonialism and state formation: "White, black, and brown are abridged, abstracted versions of colonizer, slave, and colonized."
He described the ''Aithiopes'' as "burned-faced", for the Aethiopians (Nubians).
The U.S. Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation describes white people as "having origins in any of the original peoples of Europe, the Middle East, or North Africa through racial categories used in the UCR Program adopted from the Statistical Policy Handbook (1978) and published by the Office of Federal Statistical Policy and Standards, U.S. Department of Commerce."
Also, one significant ethnic influx is derived from various Middle Eastern nations.
The process of officially being defined as ''white'' by law often came about in court disputes over pursuit of citizenship.
Among the remaining 20 percent (those descended from the population residing locally before this immigrant wave took shape in the 1870s), around a third were white.
The White population of central Mexico, despite not being as numerous as in the north due to higher mixing, is ethnically more diverse, as there are large numbers of other European and Middle Eastern ethnic groups, aside from Spaniards.
They represented groups from England, Ireland, Scotland, or Wales and were typically more literate than the Dutch.
In 1958, about 3,500 white German speaking Mennonites, who settled before in Canada and Russia, arrived in Belize.
Non-Portuguese ancestry generally is associated to an image of "foreigner", "European", and as such contributed to achieving whiter social perceptions in the color scale of the Brazilian society, even if the person is noticeably of mixed origins.
In 2013, white Salvadorans were a minority ethnic group in El Salvador, accounting for 12.7% of the country's population.
Definitions of white have changed over the years, including the official definitions used in many countries, such as the United States and Brazil.
Basque priests were the ones that introduced handball into Colombia.
This was because most of the migration occurred across the Atlantic before the construction of the Panama Canal.
''(See: Spanish immigration to Puerto Rico)''.
There were some Nazi agitators in Colombia, such as Barranquilla businessman Emil Prufurt.
Historian Winthrop Jordan reports that, "throughout the thirteen colonies the terms ''Christian'', ''free'', ''English'', and ''white'' were … employed indiscriminately" in the seventeenth century as proxies for one another.
During colonial times in the 18th century, an important flux of emigrants from Spain populated Chile, mostly Basques, who vitalized the Chilean economy and rose rapidly in the social hierarchy and became the political elite that still dominates the country.
The British Empire seized Cape Town in 1795 during the Napoleonic Wars and permanently acquired South Africa from Amsterdam in 1814.
Racial categories therefore disappeared from the dominant discourse on the Puerto Rican nation.
According to a genetic research by the National University of Colombia, performed to more than 60,000 blood tests, concluded that Colombian genetic admixture consists in a 70% European, 20% Amerindian, and 10% African ancestry.
However, due to government restrictions many of them left the country in the early 20th century.
In 1758, Carl Linnaeus proposed what he considered to be natural taxonomic categories of the human species.
Both Afrikaners and English have been politically dominant in South Africa during the past; due to the controversial racial order under ''apartheid'', the nation's predominantly Afrikaner government became a target of condemnation by other African states and the site of considerable dissension between 1948 and 1991.
There were 4.6 million whites in South Africa in 2011, down from an all-time high of 5.2 million in 1995 following a wave of emigration commencing in the late 20th century.
Within 100 years after the first Spanish settlement, nearly 95 percent of all Native Americans in Colombia had died.
Some defied official regulations through the phenomenon of "passing", many of them becoming white people, either temporarily or permanently.
Many Spanish began their explorations searching for gold, while others Spanish established themselves as leaders of the native social organizations teaching natives the Christian faith and the ways of their civilization.
According to the 2006 National Survey of Homes by the Uruguayan National Institute of Statistics: 94.6% self-identified as having a white background, 9.1% chose Black ancestry, and 4.5% chose an Amerindian ancestry (people surveyed were allowed to choose more than one option).
White Costa Ricans are mostly of Spanish ancestry, but there are also significant numbers of Costa Ricans descended from British Italian, German, English, Dutch, French, Irish, Portuguese, Lebanese and Polish families, as well a sizable Jewish community.
By the beginning of the eighteenth century, some 2,000 Europeans and their descendants were established in the region.
In at least 52 cases, people denied the status of white by immigration officials sued in court for status as white people.
The epicanthic folds around the eyes of Mongolians and their slightly sallow outer epidermal layer bespoke their supposedly crafty, literal-minded nature.
184,000 are descendants of Italians.
These color adjectives are typically found in contrast to the "standard" set by the own group, not as a self-description.
The discovery of diamonds and gold led to a greater influx of English speakers who were able to develop the mining industry with capital unavailable to Afrikaners.
Bruce David Baum, citing the work of Ruth Frankenberg, states, "the history of modern racist domination has been bound up with the history of how European peoples defined themselves (and sometimes some other peoples) as members of a superior 'white race'."
Until the last years of World War II, a large part of the European immigrants to Venezuela came from the Canary Islands, and its cultural impact was significant, influencing the development of Castilian in the country, its gastronomy and customs.
The mosque of Maicao is the second largest mosque in Latin America.
From the late 19th century, the Colonial/State and later federal governments of Australia restricted all permanent immigration to the country by non-Europeans.
According to historian Irene Silverblatt, "Race thinking … made social categories into racial truths."
While most of European or Caucasian migration into Mexico was Spanish during the colonial period, in the 19th and 20th centuries European and European derived populations from North and South America did immigrate to the country.
These policies became known as the "White Australia policy", which was consolidated and enabled by the Immigration Restriction Act 1901, but was never universally applied.
Mexico's northern regions have the greatest European population and admixture.
According to census reports, most islanders responded to the new federally mandated categories on race and ethnicity by declaring themselves "white"; few declared themselves to be Black or some other race.
Racial categories remain widely used in medical research, but this can create important problems.
For example, researchers Raj Bhopal and Liam Donaldson opine that since white people are a heterogeneous group, the term ''white'' should therefore be abandoned as a classification for the purposes of epidemiology and health research, and identifications based on geographic origin and migration history be used instead.
In 1907, European-born immigrants composed 2.4% of the Chilean population, which fell to 1.8% in 1920, and 1.5% in 1930.
The term "white race" or "white people" entered the major European languages in the later 17th century, originating with the racialization of slavery at the time, in the context of the Atlantic slave trade and the enslavement of native peoples in the Spanish Empire.
Genetic research by the University of Brasilia shows an average admixture of 60.6% European, 23.0% Amerindian and 16.3% African ancestry in Venezuelan populations.
The first British immigrants numbered about 4,000 and were introduced in 1820.
''White'' remained a more familiar term in the American colonies than in Britain well into the 1700s, according to historian Theodore Allen.
By the 1910s, after immigration rates peaked, over 30 percent of the country's population was from outside Argentina, and over half of Buenos Aires' population was foreign-born.
White Americans made up nearly 90% of the population in 1950.
In the first years of the Andean multinational company, Basque sailors navigated as captains and pilots on the majority of the ships until the country was able to train its own crews.
Similar restrictions applied in the military, some religious orders, colleges, and universities, leading to a nearly all-white priesthood and professional stratum.
The majority of Argentina's Jewish population are Ashkenazi Jews from diaspora communities in Central, Northern, and Eastern Europe, and about 15–20% are Sephardic communities from Syria.
Nearly half a million European immigrants, mostly from Spain (as a consequence of the Spanish Civil War), Italy and Portugal, entered the country during and after World War II, attracted by a prosperous, rapidly developing country where educated and skilled immigrants were welcomed.
Major contributors included Italy (initially from Piedmont, Veneto and Lombardy, later from Campania, Calabria, and Sicily), and Spain (most are Galicians and Basques, but there are Asturians, Cantabrians, Catalans, and Andalusians).
In the northwest, the majority of the relatively small indigenous communities remain isolated from the rest of the population, and as for the northeast, the indigenous population was eliminated by early European settlers, becoming the region with the highest proportion of whites during the Spanish colonial period.
Those who left their homeland in the Middle East to settle in Colombia left for different reasons such as religious, economic, and political reasons.
In 1680, Morgan Godwyn "found it necessary to explain" to English readers that "in Barbados, 'white' was 'the general name for Europeans.'"
An estimated 1.6 million (10%) to 3.2 million (20%) Chileans have a surname (one or both) of Basque origin.
Another historically significant immigrant group is Croatian.
White Colombians are mostly descendants of Spaniards.
But these communities of European and Middle Eastern descent also mostly have members with some Subsaharan African and/or Amerindian ancestry nowadays, since not only the White population of Portuguese origin which absorbed most of the descendants of the immigrants via intermarriage carried them, but interracial marriages and relationships in Brazil were common among most ethnic groups, all of them after 2 or 3 generations in the country, with many White Brazilian children being the offspring from Europeans or Middle Easterners and afrodescendant multiracials or persons of Amerindian/East Asian origin.
This contrasts with the more flexible social structures present in Latin America (derived from the Spanish colonial era ''casta'' system) where there were less clear-cut divisions between various ethnicities.
Today various records claiming the percentage of whites in Cuba are conflicting and uncertain; some reports (usually coming from Cuba) still report a less, but similar, pre-1959 number of 65% and others (usually from outside observers) report a 40–45%.
Facts about the amount of immigration do not coincide with certain national chauvinistic discourse, which claims that Chile, like Argentina or Uruguay, would be considered one of the "white" Latin American countries, in contrast to the racial mixture that prevails in the rest of the continent.
Aside from Portuguese colonization, there were large waves of immigration from Southern, Western, Northern, Central and Eastern Europe, as well as the Balkans and the Middle East, in Brazil, the fourth largest number of the Americas just after the United States, Canada and Argentina.
The change in the meaning of white that occurred in the colonies (see  above) to distinguish Europeans from non-Europeans did not apply to 'home' countries (England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales).
However, as critiques of racism and scientific arguments against the existence of race arose, a trend towards self-identification of racial status arose.
With few variations, the census of Puerto Rico used the same questionnaire as in the U.S. mainland.
They established communities in the upper reaches of the Belize River: Blue Creek on the border with Mexico; Shipyard, Indian Creek in the district of Orange Walk; Spanish Lookout and Barton Creek in the Cayo District; Little Belize, Corozal District.
SCADTA, a Colombian-German air transport corporation which was established by German expatriates in 1919, was the first commercial airline in the western hemisphere.
Several historians report a shift towards greater use of white as a legal category alongside a hardening of restrictions on free or Christian blacks.
The majority of the deaths of Native Americans were the cause of diseases such as measles and smallpox, which were spread by European settlers.
In ''United States v. Cartozian'' (1925), an Armenian immigrant successfully argued (and the Supreme Court agreed) that his nationality was white in contradistinction to other people of the Near East—Kurds, Turks, and Arabs in particular—on the basis of their Christian religious traditions.
The social definition has also been added where possible.
Other authors claim, on the other hand, that close to 4.6% of the Chilean population have some Croatian ancestry.
Puerto Ricans of Spanish and Italian (primarily via Corsica) descent comprise the majority.
According to the 2011 National Population and Housing Census, 43.6% of the Venezuelan population (approx.
Immigration inspectors were empowered to ask immigrants to take dictation from any European language as a test for admittance, a test used in practice to exclude people from Asia, Africa, and some European and South American countries, depending on the political climate.
Most of them were from Andalusia, Galicia, Basque Country and from the Canary Islands.
In the British colonies in North America and the Caribbean, the designation ''English'' or ''Christian'' was initially used in contrast to Native Americans or Africans.
In 1958, it was estimated that approximately 74% of Cubans were of European ancestry, mainly of Spanish origin, 10% of African ancestry, 15% of both African and European ancestry (mulattos), and a small 1% of the population was Asian, predominantly Chinese.
According to  John Tehranian, among those not considered white at some points in American history have been: the Germans, Greeks, white Hispanics, Arabs, Iranians, Afghans, Irish, Italians, Jews, Slavs and Spaniards.
Some left to experience the adventure of migration.
As a result, those of complete European ancestry and those of pure African ancestry have decreased, the mulatto population has increased, and the Asian population has, for all intents and purposes, disappeared.
White people (includes mestizo) make up 94%, 3% are black people, 1% are Amerindians, and 1% are Chinese.
Smaller waves of settlers from Australia and South Africa, and the United States can be traced in Argentine immigration records.
Just as race reified whiteness in the colonies, so capitalism without social welfare reified whiteness with regards to social class in 19th-century Britain and Ireland; this social distinction of whiteness became, over time, associated with racial difference.
In 1899, one year after the U.S invaded and took control of the island, 61.8% or 589,426 people self-identified as White.
In Bogota, there is a small colony of thirty to forty families who emigrated as a consequence of the Spanish Civil War or because of different opportunities.
The census shows a trend of fewer Brazilians of a different descent (most likely mixed) identifying as white people as their social status increases.
By the mid-seventeenth century, the novel term ''español'' (Spaniard) was being equated in written documents with ''blanco'', or white.
Professor David R. Roediger of the University of Illinois, suggests that the construction of the white race in the United States was an effort to mentally distance slave owners from slaves.
Europeans preferred to stay in countries closer to their homelands instead of taking the long trip through the Straits of Magellan or across the Andes.
The one drop rule attempted to create a bifurcated system of either black or white regardless of a person's physical appearance, but sometimes failed as people with African ancestry sometimes passed as "white", as noted above.
These classifications rely on individuals' self-identification, since it is recognised that ethnic identity is not an objective category.
In his 1795 edition of ''On the Natural Variety of Mankind'', Johann Friedrich Blumenbach named Europeans, Asians living west of the Obi River, Ganges River, and Caspian Sea, and people of North Africa, "Caucasian."
The terms ''White British'', ''White Irish'', ''White Scottish'' and ''White Other'' are used.
Through the mid-to-late 20th century, numerous countries had formal legal standards or procedures defining racial categories (see cleanliness of blood, apartheid in South Africa, hypodescent).
A figure of 5,000-10,000 from 1880 to 1930 may be reliable.
Whatever the figure, Syrians and Lebanese are perhaps the biggest immigrant group next to the Spanish since independence.
Italian, German, Irish, Portuguese, and Lebanese (Arab diaspora in Colombia) Colombians are found in notable numbers
It has repeatedly been ascribed to strains of blood, ancestry, and physical traits, and was eventually made into a subject of scientific research, which culminated in scientific racism, which was later widely repudiated by the scientific community.
Early British anthropologists such as John Beddoe and Robert Knox emphasised this distinction, and it was common to find texts that claimed that Welsh, Irish and Scottish people are the descendants of the indigenous more "primitive" inhabitants of the islands, while the English are the descendants of a more advanced and recent "Germanic" migration.
The 1887 national census was the final year where blacks were included as a separate category before it was eliminated by the government.
In particular, some Jewish and Arab individuals both self-identify and are considered as part of the White American racial category, but others with the same ancestry feel they are not white nor are they perceived as white by American society.
Herodotus similarly used  ''Melanchroes'' "dark-skinned" for the Egyptians.
Since the 1960s, increasing immigration from bordering countries to the north (especially from Bolivia and Paraguay, which have Amerindian and Mestizo majorities) has lessened that majority somewhat.
In conflicting rulings ''In re Hassan'' (1942) and ''Ex parte Mohriez'', United States District Courts found that Arabs did not, and did qualify as white under immigration law.
Those ''pardos'' (people with dark skin) and ''mulattos'' (people of mixed African and European ancestry) with resources largely sought to evade these restrictions by passing as white.
Aristocrats may have had less exposure to the sun and therefore a pale complexion may have been associated with status and wealth.
The first and largest wave of immigration from the Middle East began around 1880, and remained during the first two decades of the twentieth century.
Estimates of the percentage of people of African descent in the Cuban population vary enormously, ranging from 33.9 per cent to 62 per cent".
According to Gregory Jay, a professor of English at the University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee,
Writer and editor Debra Dickerson questions the legitimacy of the one drop rule, stating that "easily one-third of black people have white DNA".
For example George Sims in ''How the poor live'' (1883) wrote of "...a dark continent that is within easy reach of the General Post Office... the wild races who inhabit it will, I trust, gain public sympathy as easily as other savage tribes" and Count Gobineau in ''The Inequality of Human Races'' wrote the following:
The study into race and ethnicity in the 18th and 19th centuries developed into what would later be termed scientific racism.
Most of them live either in the Santiago area or in the Antofagasta area, and Chile is one of the 5 countries with the most descendants of Greeks in the world.
Socially, in the UK white usually refers only to people of native British, Irish and European origin.
With the beginning of oil operations during the first decades of the 20th century, citizens and companies from the United States, United Kingdom and Netherlands established themselves in Venezuela.
On the other hand the discovery of Anglo-Saxon remains also led to a belief that the English were descended from a distinct Germanic lineage that was fundamentally (and racially) different from that of the Celts.
Although no official censuses based on ethnic classification have been carried out in Argentina, some international sources state that White Argentines and other whites (Europeans) in Argentina make up somewhere between 89.7% (around 36.7 million people) and 85.8% (34.4 million) of the total population.
The Chilean Embassy in Germany estimated 150,000 to 200,000 Chileans are of German origin.
One-third of Americans classified as "white" in a study contained between two and twenty percent African genetic admixture, which can be extrapolated to about 74 million whites in America with this admixture.
However, the 2000 census included a racial self-identification question in Puerto Rico and, for the first time in since 1950, allowed respondents to choose more than one racial category to indicate mixed ancestry.
They have been joined in more subsequent decades by former colonials from elsewhere, such as Zambia and Kenya, and poorer British nationals looking to escape famine at home.
White Argentines are mainly descendants of immigrants who came from Europe and the Middle East in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
(Only 4.2% chose two or more races.)
The Arabs that went to Maicao were mostly Sunni Muslim with some Druze and Shiites, as well as Orthodox and Maronite Christians.
Few Colombians of distant Basque descent are aware of their Basque ethnic heritage.
Due to poor existing information it's impossible to know the exact number of Lebanese and Syrians that immigrated to Colombia.
In the 16th and 17th centuries, "East Asian peoples were almost uniformly described as white, never as yellow."
In the Spain's American colonies, African, Native American (''indios''), Jewish, or morisco ancestry formally excluded individuals from the "purity of blood" (''limpieza de sangre'') requirements for holding any public office under the Royal Pragmatic of 1501.
In 1775, Johann Friedrich Blumenbach described the white race as "the white color holds the first place, such as it is that most Europeans.
He distinguished between ''Homo sapiens'' and ''Homo sapiens europaeus'', and he later added four geographical subdivisions of humans: white Europeans, red Americans, yellow Asians and black Africans.
As of 2013, the white ethnic group in Nicaragua account for 17% of the country's population.
Although Linnaeus intended them as objective classifications, his descriptions of these groups included cultural patterns and derogatory stereotypes.
In the 2001 Census, persons who selected Chinese, South Asian, African, Filipino, Latin American, Southeast Asian, Arab, West Asian, Middle Eastern, Japanese or Korean were included in the visible minority population.
He categorized humans into five races, which largely corresponded with Linnaeus' classifications, except for the addition of Oceanians (whom he called Malay).
Craniometry and phrenology would attempt to make physical appearance correspond with racial categories.
An additional 90% of the population is mestizo, having mixed indigenous and European ancestry.
However, after the Cuban revolution, due to a combination of factors, mainly mass exodus to Miami, United States, a drastic decrease in immigration, and interracial reproduction, Cuba's demography has changed.
with an "intermixture of blood" from the "dark skinned Dravidian".
White in Brazil is applied as a term to people of European descent, and Middle Easterners of all ethnicities.
White people in Cuba make up 64.1% of the total population according to the 2012 census with the majority being of diverse Spanish descent.
Many of these immigrants came with money to invest and/or ties to allow them to become prominent in business and other aspects of Mexican society.
Hundreds are from Corsica, France, Italy, Portugal, Lebanon, Ireland, Scotland, and Germany, along with large numbers of immigrants from Spain.
Despite most white Cubans being of Spanish descent, many others are of French, Portuguese, German, Italian and Russian descent.
Michael Keevak's history Becoming Yellow, finds that East Asians were redesignated as being yellow-skinned because "yellow had become a ''racial'' designation," and that the replacement of white with yellow as a description came through scientific discourse.
The census figures show how Colombians see themselves in terms of race.
The redness of cheeks in this variety is almost peculiar to it: at all events it is but seldom seen in the rest... Color white, Cheeks rosy".
The cultural boundaries separating white Americans from other racial or ethnic categories are contested and always changing.
Chileans of Greek descent are estimated 90,000 to 120,000.
By the 19th century the majority of immigrants were Germans, many who were bestowed fincas and coffee plantations in Cobán, while others went to Quetzaltenango and Guatemala City.
In 1923, the Supreme Court decided in ''United States v. Bhagat Singh Thind'' that people of Indian descent were not white men, and thus not eligible to citizenship.
In the late 17th century, pirates from England, France and Holland mixed with the indigenous population and started a settlement at Bluefields (Mosquito Coast).
Roughly 500,000 Palestinian descendants are believed to reside in Chile, making it the home of the largest Palestinian community outside of the Middle East.
The term "white race" or "white people" entered the major European languages in the later 17th century, in the context of racialized slavery and unequal status in European colonies.
Criticism of the national census state that data has historically been collected using the category of national origin rather than race in Argentina, leading to undercounting Afro-Argentines and mestizos.
After the regimented Spanish colonists, waves of European settlers came to Argentina from the late nineteenth to mid-twentieth centuries.
