''maniculata'' (Cretschmar, 1826)
Small and rounded spots cover the entirety of the species' upper body.
Thomas and Hinton, 1921
It is possibly extinct in the Czech Republic, and considered regionally extinct in Austria, though vagrants from Italy are spreading into Austrian territory.
Territorial marking consists of urinating on trees, vegetation and rocks, and depositing faeces in conspicuous places.
In Celtic mythology, the wildcat was associated with rites of divination and Otherworldly encounters.
In some specimens, the forehead is covered in dense clusters of brown spots.
The Picts venerated wildcats, having probably named Caithness (Land of the Cats) after them.
Male wildcats have pre-anal pockets located on the tail, which are activated upon reaching sexual maturity.
'''Kalahari wildcat'''''F.
The size of its home range varies according to terrain, the availability of food, habitat quality, and the age structure of the population.
In Transcarpathia, the wildcat's diet consists of mouse-like rodents, galliform birds, and squirrels.
The underside is mainly white, with a light grey, creamy or pale yellow tinge.
A narrow, dark brown stripe extends from the corner of the eye to the base of the ear.
''syriaca'' (Trsitam, 1867)
A dark and narrow stripe is present on the outer corner of the eye, under the ear.
Wildcats in the northern Caucasus feed on mouse-like rodents and edible dormice, as well as birds on rare occasions.
Domestic cats are not prominent in Insular Celtic tradition (as housecats were not introduced to the British Isles until the Mediaeval period).
When dye is overly applied, wildcat fur is highly susceptible to singeing.
The only islands in the Mediterranean with native populations of wildcats are Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica and possibly Crete, where wildcats likely descended from feral populations introduced in Neolithic times.
It comes in two colour phases; iron-grey, with black and whitish speckling, and tawny-grey, with less black and more buffy speckling.
''caffra'' (A. Smith, 1826)
As a whole, the wildcat (along with the jungle and leopard cat) represents a much less specialised form than the sand cat and manul.
'''African wildcat'''''F.
'''Mid-belt wildcat'''''F.
Kittens usually appear in April–May, though some may be born from March–August.
Although primarily a solitary predator, the wildcat has been known to hunt in pairs or in family groups, with each cat devoted entirely to listening, stalking, or pouncing.
Birds taken by Prut wildcats include warblers, ferruginous ducks, coots, spotted crakes, and gadwalls.
Its fur is generally lighter than that of ''silvestris'', and is greyer in shade.
The wildcat has good night vision, having 20 to 100% higher retinal ganglion cell densities than the housecat.
The wildcat may also scratch trees, leaving visual markers, and leaving its scent through glands in its paws.
''trapezia'' (Blackler, 1916)
''pyrrhus'' (Pocock, 1944)
s. cafra'' and ''F.
When hunting aquatic prey, such as ducks or nutrias, the wildcat waits on trees overhanging the water.
The wildcat does not dig its own burrows, instead sheltering in the hollows of old or fallen trees, rock fissures, and the abandoned nests or earths of other animals (heron nests, and abandoned fox or badger earths in Europe, and abandoned fennec dens in Africa).
Similar to ''cafra'', but differs by its paler, brighter ochreous ears, paler colour, and the less distinct pattern on its fur.
'''Scottish wildcat'''''F.
It kills small prey by grabbing it in its claws, and piercing the neck or occiput with its fangs.
Its dark spots are small and sharp, but well developed throughout its trunk.
'''Tristram's wildcat'''''F.
Mespotamia, southwestern Iran, northwestern Arabian Peninsula, Syria and Palestine
Estrus lasts 5–9 days, with a gestation period lasting 60–68 days.
'''Caucasian wildcat'''''F.
The upper lips and eyelids are light, pale yellow-white.
''longipilis'' (Zukowsky, 1915)
The tail appears much thinner than that of the forest wildcat, as the hairs there are much shorter, and more close-fitting.
Northern Angola, southern part of the Congo basin and northern Zimbabwe
Sudan and Sahel woodlands
Similar to ''hausa'', but has a deeper red colour, and a larger skull.
A wildcat caught in a trap growls and snorts.
In Transcaucasia, the majority of wildcats are infested by the tick ''Ixodes ricinus''.
At some point during the Late Pleistocene (possibly 50,000 years ago), the wildcat migrated from Europe into the Middle East, giving rise to the steppe wildcat phenotype.
''sarda'' (Lataste, 1885)
Emitted by kittens summoning their mother.
The wildcat is a largely solitary animal, except during the breeding period.
In the Qarshi steppes of Uzbekistan, the wildcat's prey, in descending order of preference, includes great and red-tailed gerbils, jerboas, other rodents and passerine birds, reptiles, and insects.
silvestris'', but ''Felis bieti'' is considered a separate species.
Competitors of the wildcat include the jungle cat, golden jackal, red fox, marten, and other predators.
In the Pyrenees, it occurs from sea level to .
Until 2007, twenty-two subspecies of wildcat were recognised.
The undersurface of the body is very light grey, with a light ochreous tinge.
''murgabensis'' (Zukowsky, 1915)
The lower neck, throat, neck, and the region between the forelegs are devoid of spots, or have bear them only distinctly.
''brockmani'' (Pocock, 1944)
''griseoflava'' (Zukowsky, 1915)
After rodents, birds follow in importanance, along with reptiles, fish, insects, eggs, grass stalks and nuts (which probably enter the cat's stomach through pheasant crops).
''nubiensis'' (Kerr, 1792)
The tail is mostly the same colour as the back, with the addition of a dark and narrow stripe along the upper two-thirds of the tail.
Kittens are born blind and helpless, and are covered in a fuzzy coat.
''namaquana'' (Thomas, 1926)
Fables of the Cat Sìth, a fairy creature described as resembling a large white-chested black cat, are thought to have been inspired by the Kellas cat, itself thought to be a free ranging wildcat-houscat crossbreed.
The species' maximum life span is 21 years, though it usually only lives up to 13–14 years.
2–3 black, transverse rings occur above the tail tip.
It measures 45&nbsp;cm in body length, 29&nbsp;cm in tail length, and weighs 3&nbsp;kg.
Male and female ranges overlap, though core areas within territories are avoided by other cats.
Although the wildcat and the jungle cat occupy the same ecological niche, the two rarely encounter one another, on account of different habitat preferences: jungle cats mainly reside in lowland areas, while wildcats prefer higher elevations in beech forests.
According to the foundation myth of the Catti tribe, their ancestors were attacked by wildcats upon landing in Scotland.
A male wildcat was photographed several times in April 2013 while it was scavenging the carcass of a dead deer, an unusual behavior for a wildcat.
'''East African wildcat'''''F.
Resembles ''lybica'' and ''iraqi'', but differs by its strongly emphasised black or brown spot pattern.
The Clan Chattan Association (also known as the Clan of Cats) is made up of 12 different clans, the majority of which display the wildcat on their badges.
Unlike the housecat, the wildcat can consume large fragments of bone without ill-effect.
Central and southern Angola, northern southeast Africa and Kalahari
s. cafra'') is distributed in all east and southern African countries.
On rare occasions, young chamois and roe deer, are also attacked.
Another such stripe occurs under the eye, which also extends into the neck.
The hair on the tail is very long and dense, thus making it look furry and thick.
From time to time, small carnivores (martens, polecats, stoats, and weasels) are preyed upon, as well as the fawns of red deer, roe deer, and chamois.
The colours and patterns of the steppe wildcat vary greatly, though the general background colour of the skin on the body's upper surface is very lightly coloured.
In winter, the guard hairs measure 7&nbsp;cm, the tip hairs 5.5–6&nbsp;cm, and the underfur 4.5–5.5&nbsp;cm.
The first four are recognised by International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) as subspecies of ''F.
Between the late 1700s and mid-1900s, it was extirpated locally so that its European range became fragmented.
During the mating season, males fight viciously, and may congregate around a single female.
In contrast to European wildcats, which are notoriously difficult to tame, hand-reared African wildcats behave almost exactly like domestic tabbies, but are more intolerant of other cats, and almost invariably drive away their siblings, mates, and grown kittens.
It is sometimes converted into imitation sealskin.
The wildcat's direct ancestor was ''Felis lunensis'', or Martelli's wildcat, which lived in Europe as early as the late Pliocene.
Wildcats in the Dnestr swamps feed on small voles, water voles, and birds, while those living in the Prut swamps primarily target water voles, brown rats, and muskrats.
East Africa, southern Sudan and the northeastern part of the Congo basin
In contrast, European wildcat kittens develop much more slowly.
Spermatogenesis occurs throughout the year.
The species has two thoracic and two abdominal teats.
In the steppe regions of Europe and Asia, village dogs constitute serious enemies of wildcats, along with the much larger Eurasian Lynx, one of the rare habitual predators of healthy adults.
''morea'' (Trouessart, 1904)
The patterns on the head and neck are as well-developed as those on the tail, though the patterns on the flanks are almost imperceptible.
s. bieti'') is indigenous to western China, and is particularly abundant in the Qinghai and possibly Sichuan provinces.
This stripe may extend into the neck.
Also, like the African wildcat, the housecat's tail is usually thin, rather than thick and bushy like the European wildcat's.
When living close to human habitations, the wildcat can be a serious poultry predator.
The eyelashes range from 5 to 6&nbsp;cm in length, and can number 6 to 8 per side.
Smaller than ''silvestris'', measuring 70–75&nbsp;cm in body length, 26–28&nbsp;cm in shoulder height, and weighing usually 5.20–6&nbsp;kg.
On the ground, it lies in wait for prey, then catches it by executing a few leaps, which can span three metres.
Central and northwestern India and Pakistan
Compared to other members of the ''Felinae'', the wildcat is a small species, but is nonetheless larger than the housecat.
The wildcat has two estrus periods, one in December–February and another in May–July.
''nandae'' (Heller, 1913)
The African wildcat lacks the sharply defined dorsal stripe present in the European wildcat, a trait which corresponds with the coat patterns found in striped tabbies.
Both sexes possess pre-anal glands, which consist of moderately sized sweat and sebaceous glands around the anal opening.
''torquata'' (Blyth, 1863)
''euxina'' (Pocock, 1943)
The Chief of Clan Sutherland bears the title ''Morair Chat'' (Great Man of the Cats).
European hares are also taken on occasion.
The family dissolves after roughly five months, and the kittens disperse to establish their own territories.
Because of its wide range it is assessed as Least Concern on the IUCN Red List since 2002.
'''Cretan wildcat'''''F.
*The African wildcat (''F.
However, wildcat subspecies of the ''lybica'' group do exhibit some further specialisation, namely in the structure of the auditory bullae, which bears similarity to those of the sand cat and manul.
''vernayi'' (Roberts, 1932)
Its ears are reddish brown, and its tail is relatively long, with several rings and a brown tip.
Its fur is quite dark, with a grey tone.
'''Turkestan wildcat'''''F.
''guttata'' (Hermann, 1804)
In Tajikistan, wolves are their most serious enemies, having been observed to destroy cat burrows.
The eyes are large, with vertical pupils, and yellowish-green irises.
Shakespeare referenced the wildcat three times:
The border between the two subspecies is estimated to occur in the area of Tanzania and Mozambique.
A scent trail of pheasant viscera leads the cat to the pit.
''caligata'' (Temminck, 1824)
The earliest evidence of wildcat taming comes from 9,500-year-old Neolithic graves excavated in Shillourokambos, Cyprus, that contained the skeletons of a human and a cat, buried close to one another.
''mauritana'' (Cabrera, 1906)
''mediterranea'' (Martorelli, 1896)
*The Southern African wildcat (''F.
Sight and hearing are the wildcat's primary senses when hunting, its sense of smell being comparatively weak.
Females tend to be more sedentary than males, as they require an exclusive hunting area when raising kittens.
In favourable conditions, it will readily feed in fields.
Near Repetek, the wildcat is responsible for destroying over 50% of nests made by desert finches, streaked scrub warblers, red-tailed warblers, and turtledoves.
Males measure  in body length,  in tail length, and normally weigh .
Within possibly 10,000 years, the steppe wildcat spread eastwards into Asia and southwards to Africa.
In the wild, the wildcat consumes up to 600&nbsp;grams of food daily.
The taxonomist Pocock reviewed wildcat skins collected in the British Museum, and in 1951 designated three ''Felis bieti'' subspecies from Eastern Asia, seven ''Felis silvestris'' subspecies from Europe to Asia Minor, and 25 ''Felis lybica'' subspecies from Africa, and West to Central Asia.
Their eyes open after 9–12 days, and their incisors erupt after 14–30 days.
The wildcat's summer coat has a fairly light, pure background colour, with an admixture of ochre or brown.
In the former Soviet Union, the fur of a forest wildcat usually fetched 50 kopecks, while that of a steppe wildcat fetched 60 kopecks.
The hairs along the spine are usually darker, forming a dark grey, brownish, or ochreous band.
Specimens in Sardinia differ from their North African counterparts by their darker ears and generally darker upper sides, lacking the typical sandy tone present in North African specimens.
On one occasion, the feathers of a white-tailed eagle and the skull of a kid were found at a den site.
Wildcat skin is almost solely used for making cheap scarfs, muffs, and women's coats.
s. ornata'') ranges from the east of the Caspian Sea into western India, north to Kazakhstan and into western China and southern Mongolia.
''obscura'' (Desmarest, 1820)
Its skull is more spherical in shape than that of the jungle and leopard cat.
However, ''caudata'''s head is slighter larger, and its tail is longer.
A slight ochreous shade is visible on the undersides of the flanks.
Since publication of results of a phylogeographical analysis, only five subspecific groups have been suggested, including the Chinese mountain cat.
In the Carpathians, the wildcat feeds primarily on yellow-necked mice, red-backed voles, and ground voles.
The wildcat subspecies that gave rise to the housecat is most likely the African wildcat, based on genetics, morphology, and behaviour.
Its general colour is grizzled buff, with indistinct stripes and spots, and a pale brown lacrimal stripe.
In subsequent decades, several naturalists and explorers described wildcats from European, African and Asian countries.
''xanthella'' (Thomas, 1926)
In Moldavia, the wildcat's winter diet consists primarily of rodents, while birds, fish, and crayfish are eaten in summer.
It occurs throughout the savannahs of West Africa, from Mauritania on the Atlantic seaboard eastwards to the Horn of Africa (Somalia, Ethiopia, Eritrea, and Djibouti) and Sudan.
The species size varies according to Bergmann's rule, with the largest specimens occurring in cool, northern areas of Europe (such as Scotland and Scandinavia) and of Middle Asia (such as Mongolia, Manchuria and Siberia).
''ferus'' (Erxleben, 1777)
Sardinia, Sicily, northern parts of North Africa from Cyrenaica to Morocco and southern Atlas, and Algerian Sahara
The dorsal surface of the neck and head are the same colour as that of the trunk, but is lighter grey around the eyes, lips, cheeks, and chin.
The kittens are largely fully grown by 10 months, though skeletal growth continues for over 18–19 months.
Small numbers occur in true deserts such as the Sahara, particularly in hilly and mountainous areas, such as the Hoggar.
The patterns on the head and the dorsal band are well developed, though the transverse bands and spots on the trunk are mostly faint or absent.
The wildcat will pursue prey atop trees, even jumping from one branch to another.
Wildcats in Azerbaijan carry ''Hydatigera krepkogorski'' and ''T.
s. silvestris'', ''F.
'''Arabian wildcat'''''F.
Within its territory, the wildcat leaves scent marks in different sites, the quantity of which increases during estrus, when the cat's preanal glands enlarge and secrete strong smelling substances, including trimethylamine.
''maniculata'' (Yerbury and Thomas, 1895)
When attacking large prey, the wildcat leaps upon the animal's back, and attempts to bite the neck or carotid.
*'''Steppe wildcats''' (''ornata''-''caudata'' group): distinguished from the forest wildcats by their smaller size, longer, more sharply pointed tails, and comparatively lighter fur colour; includes the subspecies ''ornata'', ''nesterovi'' and ''iraki''.
Most of Europe, except Scandinavia, Scotland and islands in the Mediterranean Sea
Although a furbearer, the wildcat's skin is of little commercial value, due to the unattractive colour of its natural state, and the difficulties present in dyeing it.
''taitae'' (Heller, 1913)
They are born with pink paw pads, which blacken at the age of three months, and blue eyes, which turn amber after five months.
''servalina'' (Jardine, 1834)
s. lybica'') occurs across northern Africa, around the Arabian Peninsula's periphery to the Caspian Sea, encompassing a wide range of habitats, with the exception of closed tropical forests.
Guinea, French Sudan and Nigeria in West Africa
Whereas the Asiatic wildcat is spotted, the African wildcat is faintly striped, has short sandy-grey fur, banded legs, red-backed ears and a tapering tail.
The tail is long, and usually slightly exceeds one-half of the animal's body length.
Wilcats in eastern Kyzyl Kum have similar prey preferences, with the addition of tolai hares, midday gerbils, five-toed jerboas, and steppe agamas.
''dongolana'' (Hemprich and Ehrenberg, 1832)
Females are slightly smaller, measuring  in body length and  in tail length, and weighing .
Lactation lasts 3–4 months, though the kittens will eat meat as early as 1.5 months of age.
The kittens' milk teeth are replaced by their permanent dentition at the age of 160–240 days.
, 22 subspecies were recognised by ''Mammal Species of the World''.
