Also, fires in the rainforest, along with drought and human involvement, could damage or destroy more than half of the Amazon rainforest by the year 2030.
A meta-analysis found that 17 times more land burned annually in California before 1800 compared to recent decades (1,800,000 hectares/year compared to 102,000 hectares/year).
They are composed of nitrates, ammonia, phosphates and sulfates, as well as other chemicals and thickening agents.
However, large fires that exceed suppression capabilities are often regarded as statistical outliers in standard analyses, even though fire policies are more influenced by large wildfires than by small fires.
Carbon monoxide levels reached up to 160ppm and the TLV irritant index value reached a high of 10.
Scottish botanist David Douglas noted the native use of fire for tobacco cultivation, to encourage deer into smaller areas for hunting purposes, and to improve foraging for honey and grasshoppers.
Today the United States' maintains that, "fire, as a critical natural process, will be integrated into land and resource management plans and activities on a landscape scale, and across agency boundaries.
The application of aerial fire retardants creates an atypical appearance on land and water surfaces and has the potential to change soil chemistry.
By the 1980s, in light of this new understanding, funding efforts began to support prescribed burning in order to prevent wildfire events.
Fuels may also be removed by logging, but fuels treatments and thinning have no effect on severe fire behavior  Wildfire itself is reportedly "the most effective treatment for reducing a fire's rate of spread, fireline intensity, flame length, and heat per unit of area" according to Jan Van Wagtendonk, a biologist at the Yellowstone Field Station.
Such adaptations include physical protection against heat, increased growth after a fire event, and flammable materials that encourage fire and may eliminate competition.
Wildfire’s occurrence throughout the history of terrestrial life invites conjecture that fire must have had pronounced evolutionary effects on most ecosystems' flora and fauna.
Symptoms of these complications include wheezing and shortness of breath and cardiovascular symptoms include chest pain, rapid heart rate and fatigue.
These include post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression, anxiety, and phobias.
Fire retardant may also affect water quality through leaching, eutrophication, or misapplication.
Pyrocumulus clouds can reach  over wildfires.
Years of precipitation followed by warm periods can encourage more widespread fires and longer fire seasons.
Silver iodide can be used to encourage snow fall, while fire retardants and water can be dropped onto fires by unmanned aerial vehicles, planes, and helicopters.
The south consistently has the highest number of wildfires per year.
Mechanical methods include the use of chippers and other machinery to remove hazardous fuels and thereby reduce the risk of wildfire events.
Lepidodendron forests dating to the Carboniferous period have charred peaks, evidence of crown fires.
Fire fighters should maintain good physical fitness.
An optimum fire frequency for growth is every 3 to 10 years.
Overall, fire types can be generally characterized by their fuels as follows:
In China and in the Mediterranean Basin, human carelessness is a major cause of wildfires.
This prompted concern from area residents and Idaho State Department of Environmental Quality officials over the potential spread of radiation in the resultant smoke, since those sites had never been completely cleaned up from radioactive remains.
In more advanced nations, the suppression methods vary due to increased technological capacity.
Fitness programs, medical screening and examination programs which include stress tests can minimize the risks of firefighting cardiac problems.
In 2014, legislators proposed The Wildfire Disaster Funding Act to provide $2.7 billion fund appropriated by congress for the USDA and Department of Interior to use in fire suppression.
In the post-World War II Baltic region, socio-economic changes led more stringent air quality standards and bans on fires that eliminated traditional burning practices.
A wildfire's burning front may also change direction unexpectedly and jump across fire breaks.
Coal seam fires burn in the thousands around the world, such as those in Burning Mountain, New South Wales; Centralia, Pennsylvania; and several coal-sustained fires in China.
Wildfire prevention refers to the preemptive methods aimed at reducing the risk of fires as well as lessening its severity and spread.
However, even at lower concentrations, such as those found at wildfires, individuals with cardiovascular disease may experience chest pain and cardiac arrhythmia.
Invasive species, such as ''Lygodium microphyllum'' and ''Bromus tectorum'', can grow rapidly in areas that were damaged by fires.
The smoke and dust from wildfires can contain gases such as carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide and formaldehyde, as well as particulates such as ash and silica.
Because they are highly flammable, they can increase the future risk of fire, creating a positive feedback loop that increases fire frequency and further alters native vegetation communities.
Cape lilies lie dormant until flames brush away the covering, then blossom almost overnight.
FEMA and the NFPA develop specific policies to guide homeowners and builders in how to build and maintain structures at the WUI and how protect against property losses.
Especially large wildfires may affect air currents in their immediate vicinities by the stack effect: air rises as it is heated, and large wildfires create powerful updrafts that will draw in new, cooler air from surrounding areas in thermal columns.
Alteration of fuels is commonly undertaken when attempting to affect future fire risk and behavior.
Nationally, the burden of wildfires is disproportionally heavily distributed in the southern and western regions.
As a result, the U.S. Forest Service was able to acquire a deficit of over $1 million in 1910 due to emergency fire suppression efforts.
A 2003 wildfire in the North Yorkshire Moors destroyed  of heather and the underlying peat layers.
At night the land cools, creating air currents that travel downhill.
Wildfire’s occurrence throughout the history of terrestrial life invites conjecture that fire must have had pronounced evolutionary effects on most ecosystems' flora and fauna.
Wildfires are naturally occurring events that aid in promoting forest health.
Kudzu, Old World climbing fern, and other invasive plants that scale trees may also encourage ladder fires.
A government report on a recent trial of three automated camera fire detection systems in Australia did, however, conclude "...detection by the camera systems was slower and less reliable than by a trained human observer".
Firefighters are at the greatest risk for acute and chronic health effects resulting from wildfire smoke exposure.
Smoldering surface fires started to occur sometime before the Early Devonian period .
Wildland fire use is the cheapest and most ecologically appropriate policy for many forests.
Continued residential development in fire-prone areas and rebuilding structures destroyed by fires has been met with criticism.
Fire lookout towers were used in the United States in the early 20th century and fires were reported using telephones, carrier pigeons, and heliographs.
Wildfires generate ash, destroy available organic nutrients, and cause an increase in water runoff, eroding away other nutrients and creating flash flood conditions.
A 2015 study indicates that the increase in fire risk in California may be attributable to human-induced climate change.
5–10% are overexposed.
One initiative aimed at helping U.S. WUI communities live more safely with fire is called fire-adapted communities.
Detection systems may include wireless sensor networks that act as automated weather systems: detecting temperature, humidity, and smoke.
This can lead to heat-related illnesses, such as heat rash, cramps, exhaustion or heat stroke.
During the Yellowstone fires of 1988, a data station was established in West Yellowstone, permitting the delivery of satellite-based fire information in approximately four hours.
Annual grassland fires in southern Vietnam stem in part from the destruction of forested areas by US military herbicides, explosives, and mechanical land-clearing and -burning operations during the Vietnam War.
An aspect of wildfire policy that is gaining attention is the wildland-urban interface (WUI).
Building codes in fire-prone areas typically require that structures be built of flame-resistant materials and a defensible space be maintained by clearing flammable materials within a prescribed distance from the structure.
Later posters of the program featured Uncle Sam, leaders of the Axis powers of World War II, characters from the Disney movie ''Bambi'', and the official mascot of the U.S. Forest Service, Smokey Bear.
It is commonly accepted that past fire suppression and climate change has resulted in larger, more intense wildfire events which are seen today.
In certain instances, fire retardant may also be applied ahead of wildfires for protection of structures and vegetation as a precautionary fire defense measure.
North American firefighting policies permit naturally caused fires to burn to maintain their ecological role, so long as the risks of escape into high-value areas are mitigated.
Dilution factors, including water body size, rainfall, and water flow rates lessen the concentration and potency of fire retardant.
Coarse particles are between 2.5 micrometers and 10 micrometers and fine particles measure 2.5 micrometers and less.
Fast and effective detection is a key factor in wildfire fighting.
Satellite observation of smoke plumes from wildfires revealed that the plumes could be traced intact for distances exceeding .
Fire retardant can decrease the availability of plant nutrients in the soil by increasing the acidity of the soil.
Currently, public hotlines, fire lookouts in towers, and ground and aerial patrols can be used as a means of early detection of forest fires.
Dendrochronological fire scar data and charcoal layer data in Finland suggests that, while many fires occurred during severe drought conditions, an increase in the number of fires during 850 BC and 1660 AD can be attributed to human influence.
The human use of fire for agricultural and hunting purposes during the Paleolithic and Mesolithic ages altered the preexisting landscapes and fire regimes.
Burn rates of smoldering logs are up to five times greater during the day due to lower humidity, increased temperatures, and increased wind speeds.
Smoke, ash, and debris can also pose serious respiratory hazards to wildland fire fighters.
The model uses data on weather conditions and the land surrounding an active fire to predict 12–18 hours in advance whether a blaze will shift direction.
For example, NFPA-1141 is a standard for fire protection infrastructure for land development in wildland, rural and suburban areas and NFPA-1144 is a standard for reducing structure ignition hazards from wildland fire.
For this reason, carbon monoxide inhalation is a serious threat to the health of wildfire firefighters.
Most of the Earth's weather and air pollution resides in the troposphere, the part of the atmosphere that extends from the surface of the planet to a height of about .
Less dense material such as grasses and leaves are easier to ignite because they contain less water than denser material such as branches and trunks.
In Germany, regular burning was documented in 1290 in the Odenwald and in 1344 in the Black Forest.
Previous NASA satellite data products available since the early 2000s observed fires at 3,280 foot (1 kilometer) resolution.
For example, during the 1949 Mann Gulch fire in Montana, USA, thirteen smokejumpers died when they lost their communication links, became disoriented, and were overtaken by the fire.
Atmospheric models suggest that these concentrations of sooty particles could increase absorption of incoming solar radiation during winter months by as much as 15%.
The south is one of the fastest growing regions with 88 million acres classified as WUI.
Such careful use of fire has been employed for centuries in the lands protected by Kakadu National Park to encourage biodiversity.
This period was followed by an overall decrease in burning in the 20th century, linked to the expansion of agriculture, increased livestock grazing, and fire prevention efforts.
The most common cause of wildfires varies throughout the world.
Wildfires have a rapid ''forward rate of spread'' (FROS) when burning through dense, uninterrupted fuels.
* '''Ground''' fires are fed by subterranean roots, duff and other buried organic matter.
Despite carbon dioxide's high concentration in smoke, it poses a low health risk due to its low toxicity.
Strategies of wildfire prevention, detection, and suppression have varied over the years.
Modern growth models utilize a combination of past ellipsoidal descriptions and Huygens' Principle to simulate fire growth as a continuously expanding polygon.
High-temperature and long-duration surface wildfires may encourage flashover or ''torching'': the drying of tree canopies and their subsequent ignition from below.
In the Australian February 2009 Victorian bushfires, at least 173 people died and over 2,029 homes and 3,500 structures were lost when they became engulfed by wildfire.
Using computational science, wildfire modeling involves the statistical analysis of past fire events to predict spotting risks and front behavior.
The principal health concern is the inhalation of particulate matter and carbon monoxide.
Heat waves, droughts, cyclical climate changes such as El Niño, and regional weather patterns such as high-pressure ridges can increase the risk and alter the behavior of wildfires dramatically.
Fire retardant's effects on drinking water remain inconclusive.
Protective clothing and equipment can also help minimize exposure to smoke and ash.
Fuels may also be removed by logging, but fuels treatments and thinning have no effect on severe fire behavior  Wildfire models are often used to predict and compare the benefits of different fuel treatments on future wildfire spread, but their accuracy is low.
A wildfire ''front'' is the portion sustaining continuous flaming combustion, where unburned material meets active flames, or the smoldering transition between unburned and burned material.
Particulate matter (PM) is a type of air pollution made up of particles of dust and liquid droplets.
They are characterized into two categories based on the diameter of the particle.
In Spain during the 1550s, sheep husbandry was discouraged in certain provinces by Philip II due to the harmful effects of fires used in transhumance.
They can also flare up unexpectedly and ignite nearby flammable material.
The state of Colorado decided to incorporate the weather-fire model in its firefighting efforts beginning with the 2016 fire season.
Intense heat and smoke can lead to disorientation and loss of appreciation of the direction of the fire, which can make fires particularly dangerous.
The fine particles are more problematic because, when inhaled, they can be deposited deep into the lungs, where they are absorbed into the bloodstream.
Cloud cover and image resolution and may also limit the effectiveness of satellite imagery.
For example, the Forest Fire Emergency Fund Act of 1908 permitted deficit spending in the case of emergency fire situations.
Wildland fire use is the cheapest and most ecologically appropriate policy for many forests.
Compensation for losses in the WUI are typically negotiated on an incident-by-incident basis.
Caribbean Pine in Bahamian pineyards have adapted to and rely on low-intensity, surface fires for survival and growth.
Above all, fighting wildfires can become deadly.
Forested areas cleared by logging encourage the dominance of flammable grasses, and abandoned logging roads overgrown by vegetation may act as fire corridors.
Wildfires have continually been a threat to human populations.
As early as the 17th century, Native Americans were observed using fire for many purposes including cultivation, signaling, and warfare.
Early satellite-derived fire analyses were hand-drawn on maps at a remote site and sent via overnight mail to the fire manager.
High-severity wildfire creates complex early seral forest habitat (also called “snag forest habitat”), which often has higher species richness and diversity than unburned old forest.
Wildfire prevention programs around the world may employ techniques such as ''wildland fire use'' and ''prescribed or controlled burns''.
Previously, prevailing scientific theory held that most particles in the stratosphere came from volcanoes, but smoke and other wildfire emissions have been detected from the lower stratosphere.
One particular area of focus is wildland fires.
In the early 20th century, for example, the federal government, through the U.S. Army and the U.S. Forest Service, solicited fire suppression as a primary goal of managing the nation's forests.
The negative sentiment towards wildland fire prevailed and helped to shape wildland fire management objectives throughout most of the 20th century.
Such places include the vegetated areas of Australia and Southeast Asia, the veld in southern Africa, the fynbos in the Western Cape of South Africa, the forested areas of the United States and Canada, and the Mediterranean Basin.
The choice of whether to apply retardant depends on the magnitude, location and intensity of the wildfire.
As these grasses shifted to more mesic habitats, their high flammability increased fire frequency, promoting grasslands over woodlands.
In economic terms, expenditures used for wildfire suppression in the early 20th century have contributed to increased suppression costs which are being realized today.
* '''Crawling''' or '''surface''' fires are fueled by low-lying vegetation such as leaf and timber litter, debris, grass, and low-lying shrubbery.
Wildfire suppression operations in the United States revolve around a 24-hour ''fire day'' that begins at 10:00&nbsp;a.m. due to the predictable increase in intensity resulting from the daytime warmth.
Vegetation may be burned periodically to maintain high species diversity and frequent burning of surface fuels limits fuel accumulation.
Especially in hot weather condition, fires present the risk of heat stress, which can entail feeling heat, fatigue, weakness, vertigo, headache, or nausea.
However, accurate human observation may be limited by operator fatigue, time of day, time of year, and geographic location.
A national assessment of wildfire risk in the United States based on GACG identified regions (with the slight modification of combining Southern and Northern California, and the West and East Basin); indicate that California (50.22% risk) and the Southern Area (15.53% risk) are the geographic areas with the highest wildfire risk.
Later, a decrease in wildfire-related charcoal deposits from the late Permian to the Triassic periods is explained by a decrease in oxygen levels.
As such, the decision was made to devote public funds to fire suppression and fire prevention efforts.
In other parts of the world, human involvement is a major contributor.
Beginning in the 1970s public perception of wildland fire management began to shift.
One common and inexpensive technique is controlled burning: permitting or even igniting smaller fires to minimize the amount of flammable material available for a potential wildfire.
These statistics are greatly attributable to the South's year-round fire season.
Satellite and aerial monitoring through the use of planes, helicopter, or UAVs can provide a wider view and may be sufficient to monitor very large, low risk areas.
Since the mid-1980s, earlier snowmelt and associated warming has also been associated with an increase in length and severity of the wildfire season in the Western United States.
The firefighter was exposed to a wide range of carbon monoxide and respiratory irritant (combination of particulate matter 3.5&nbsp;µm and smaller, acrolein, and formaldehype) levels.
Wildfires during the Paleozoic and Mesozoic periods followed patterns similar to fires that occur in modern times.
In the United States and Australia, the source of wildfires can be traced both to lightning strikes and to human activities (such as machinery sparks, cast-away cigarette butts, or arson)."
Additionally, there is evidence of an increase in material stress, as documented by researchers M.H.
Ecologists were beginning to recognize the presence and ecological importance of natural, lightning-ignited wildfires across the United States.
In 1937, U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt initiated a nationwide fire prevention campaign, highlighting the role of human carelessness in forest fires.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Hazard Mapping System combines remote-sensing data from satellite sources such as Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES), Moderate-Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), and Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) for detection of fire and smoke plume locations.
Heat stress can progress into heat strain, which entails physiological changes such as increased heart rate and core body temperature.
From the Middle ages, accounts were written of occupational burning as well as customs and laws that governed the use of fire.
Wildfire modeling aims to aid wildfire suppression, increase the safety of firefighters and the public, and minimize damage.
''Controlled burns'' are fires ignited by government agencies under less dangerous weather conditions.
Charcoal evidence from the Americas suggested a general decrease in wildfires between 1 AD and 1750 compared to previous years.
The vertical lift of a severe thunderstorm or pyrocumulonimbus can be enhanced in the area of a large wildfire, which can propel smoke, soot, and other particulate matter as high as the lower stratosphere.
In Australian bushfires, spot fires are known to occur as far as  from the fire front.
Both sizes can be inhaled.
Dense forests usually provide more shade, resulting in lower ambient temperatures and greater humidity, and are therefore less susceptible to wildfires.
Recently, it was demonstrated that mothers who were pregnant during the fires gave birth to babies with a slightly reduced average birth weight compared to those who were not exposed to wildfire during birth.
Wildfires can advance tangential to the main front to form a ''flanking'' front, or burn in the opposite direction of the main front by ''backing''.
Wildfire smoke is composed of carbon dioxide, water vapor, particulate matter, organic chemicals, nitrogen oxides and other compounds.
Research in Alaska has shown fire-event return intervals, (FRIs) that typically vary from 150 to 200 years with dryer lowland areas burning more frequently than wetter upland areas.
Complete fire suppression is no longer an expectation, but the majority of wildfires are often extinguished before they grow out of control.
Since the turn of the 20th century, various federal and state agencies have been involved in wildland fire management in one form or another.
Wildfire debris (ash and sediment) clog rivers and reservoirs increasing the risk for floods and erosion that ultimately slow and/or damage water treatment systems.
Wildfire modeling is concerned with numerical simulation of wildfires in order to comprehend and predict fire behavior.
The degree of wildfire smoke exposure to an individual is dependent on the length, severity, duration, and proximity of the fire.
Fires in Europe occur frequently during the hours of 12:00&nbsp;p.m. and 2:00&nbsp;p.m.
While these options cannot completely replace fire suppression as a fire management tool, other options can play an important role in overall fire management and can therefore affect the costs of fire suppression.
Suggesting that pregnant women may also be at greater risk to adverse effects from wildfire.
Global warming and climate changes are causing an increase in temperatures and more droughts nationwide which contributes to an increase in wildfire risk.
However, while ancient Hebrew, Greek, and Roman writers were aware of fires, they were not very interested in the uncultivated lands where wildfires occurred.
Early attempts to determine wildfire behavior assumed terrain and vegetation uniformity.
The thermal heat from wildfire can cause significant weathering of rocks and boulders, heat can rapidly expand a boulder and thermal shock can occur, which may cause an object's structure to fail.
''Wildland fire use'' refers to any fire of natural causes that is monitored but allowed to burn.
Wildfire itself is reportedly "the most effective treatment for reducing a fire's rate of spread, fireline intensity, flame length, and heat per unit of area" according to Jan Van Wagtendonk, a biologist at the Yellowstone Field Station.
Computer-aided models such as CALPUFF may help predict the size and direction of wildfire-generated smoke plumes by using atmospheric dispersion modeling.
Camps and command posts should also be located upwind of wildfires.
Another important and somewhat less obvious health effect of wildfires is psychiatric diseases and disorders.
Wildfire risk is the chance that a wildfire will start in or reach a particular area and the potential loss of human values if it does.
Building codes in fire-prone areas typically require that structures be built of flame-resistant materials and a defensible space be maintained by clearing flammable materials within a prescribed distance from the structure.
The increased fire frequency in these ordinarily fire-dependent areas has upset natural cycles, damaged native plant communities, and encouraged the growth of non-native weeds.
A '''wildfire''' or '''wildland fire''' is a fire in an area of combustible vegetation that occurs in the countryside or rural area.
Sunlight warms the ground during the day which creates air currents that travel uphill.
Wildfires were used in battles throughout human history as early thermal weapons.
Fire retardants are used to reach inaccessible geographical regions where ground firefighting crews are unable to reach a wildfire or in any occasion where human safety and structures are endangered.
Wildfires can cause damage to property and human life, but they have many beneficial effects on native vegetation, animals, and ecosystems that have evolved with fire.
Exposure to residents is greatly dependent on individual susceptibility.
O'Donnell and A.M. Behie, thus affecting birth outcomes.
More and more people are living in "red zones," or areas that are at high risk of wildfires.
Similar to that of military operations, fire management is often very expensive in the U.S. and the rest of the world.
Larger, medium-risk areas can be monitored by scanning towers that incorporate fixed cameras and sensors to detect smoke or additional factors such as the infrared signature of carbon dioxide produced by fires.
Through this policy, the agency advocated the control of all fires by 10 o'clock of the morning following the discovery of a wildfire.
Later, the overall increase of atmospheric oxygen from 13% in the Late Devonian to 30-31% by the Late Permian was accompanied by a more widespread distribution of wildfires.
In the 14th century Sardinia, firebreaks were used for wildfire protection.
Wildfires are common in climates that are sufficiently moist to allow the growth of vegetation but feature extended dry, hot periods.
