Neolithic hunter gatherers depicted reliefs of ferocious wild boars on their temple pillars at Göbekli Tepe some 11,600 years ago.
The wild boar features prominently in the cultures of Indo-European people, many of which saw the animal as embodying warrior virtues.
Fully grown males are usually solitary outside of the breeding season.
This theme also occurs in Irish and Egyptian mythology, where the animal is explicitly linked to the month of October, therefore autumn.
The eyes are small and deep-set, and the ears long and broad.
These are considered as an additional single 'new breeding population' and currently estimated to be up to 100 animals.
When feeding, boars express their contentment through purring.
By August it was stated that efforts were being made to reduce the population from 200 to 90, but that only 25 had been killed.
By two weeks of age, the piglets begin accompanying their mother on her journeys.
Historical records indicate that Asian pigs were introduced into Europe during the 18th and early 19th centuries.
Sexual dimorphism is very pronounced in the species, with males being typically 5-10% larger and 20-30% heavier than females.
'''Anatolian boar'''''S.
In England, wild boar populations re-established themselves in the 1990s, after escaping from specialist farms that had imported European stock.
In 2013, one boar was reported to have completed the seven mile swim from France to Alderney in the Channel Islands.
Such giants are rare in modern times, due to past overhunting preventing animals from attaining their full growth.
Wild boars are known to host at least 20 different parasitic worm species, with maximum infections occurring in summer.
The species has well developed canine teeth, which protrude from the mouths of adult males.
Prince Kamal el Dine Hussein attempted to repopulate Wadi El Natrun with boars of Hungarian stock, but they were quickly exterminated by poachers.
It is absent in the higher elevations of Pamir and Tien Shan, though they do occur in the Tarim basin and on the lower slopes of the Tien Shan.
While domestic pigs, both captive and feral (popularly termed "razorbacks"), have been in North America since the earliest days of European colonization, pure wild boar were not introduced into the New World until the 19th century.
In Russia they were extirpated in wide areas in the 1930s.
''mediterraneus'' (Ulmansky, 1911)
s. riukiuanus'', ''S.
There was also a separate domestication in China which took place about 8000 years ago.
By 1950 wild boar had once again reached their original northern boundary in many parts of their Asiatic range.
Boar is sometimes used specifically to refer to males, and may also be used to refer to male domesticated pigs, especially breeding males that have not been castrated.
Foot-and-mouth disease can also take on epidemic proportions in boar populations.
* '''Eastern:''' Includes ''S.
Two further introductions were done since the original stocking, with several escapes taking place due to breaches in the game preserve's fencing.
'''Ryukyu boar'''''S.
The Romans and Ancient Greeks wrote of these attacks (Odysseus was wounded by a boar), and several attacks are shown on the headstones of England's 12th century Severn Temple graveyard.
Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco
* The smallest, in west Dorset, was estimated to be fewer than 50 animals.
However, estrus usually first occurs after two years in sows, while males begin participating in the rut after 4–5 years, as they are not permitted to mate by the older males.
In the Amur region, wild boars are one of the two most important prey species for tigers alongside the Manchurian wapiti, with the two species collectively comprising roughly 80% of the felid's prey.
In 1924, a dozen Hooper Bald wild pigs were shipped to California and released in a property between Carmel Valley and the Los Padres National Forest.
There is at least one record of a boar killing and eating a bonnet macaque in southern India's Bandipur National Park, though this may have been a case of intraguild predation, brought on by interspecific competition for human handouts.
The white boar served as the badge of King Richard III of England, who distributed it among his northern retainers during his tenure as Duke of Gloucester.
In the story's retelling in the Charaka Samhita, the boar is described as a form of Prajāpti, and is credited with having raised the earth from the primeval waters.
The demigod Herakles' third labour involves the capture of the Erymanthian Boar, Theseus slays the wild sow Phaea, and a disguised Odysseus is recognised by his handmaiden Eurycleia by the scars inflicted on him by a boar during a hunt in his youth.
s. leucomystax'', ''S.
On the islands of Komodo, Rinca, and Flores, the boar's main predator is the Komodo dragon.
Although growing in popularity as a captive-bred source of food, the wild boar takes longer to mature than most domestic pigs, and is usually smaller and produces less meat.
The effects of wild boar on the UK's woodlands were discussed with Ralph Harmer of the Forestry Commission on the 's ''Farming Today'' radio programme in 2011.
In the Rāmāyaṇa and the Purāṇas, the same boar is portrayed as an avatar of Vishnu.
s. scrofa'', and its ears smaller and more pointed.
The animal can run at a maximum speed of 40&nbsp;km/h and jump at a height of .
On Sakhalin, there are only fossil reports of wild boar.
A long-maned subspecies with a coat that is brindled black unlike ''S.
The animal typically attacks by charging and pointing its tusks towards the intended victim, with most injuries occurring on the thigh region.
The theme of the doomed, yet valorous boar warrior also occurred in Hittite culture, where it was traditional to sacrifice a boar alongside a dog and a prisoner of war after a military defeat.
The animal was seen as a source of food among the Ancient Greeks, as well as a sporting challenge and source of epic narratives.
Still within Japanese culture, the boar's status as vermin is expressed through its title as "king of pests" and the popular saying (addressed to young men in rural areas) "When you get married, choose a place with no wild boar."
A typical Roman boarhunting tactic involved surrounding a given area with large nets, then flushing the boar with dogs and immobilising it with smaller nets.
s. vittatus'', it is characterised by its sparse body hair, lack of underwool, fairly long mane, a broad reddish band extending from the muzzle to the sides of the neck.
It was once found in North Africa along the Nile valley up to Khartum and north of the Sahara.
'''Central European boar'''''S.
There are significant variations within this subspecies, and it is possible there actually are several subspecies involved.
Occasional escapes of wild boar from wildlife parks have occurred as early as the 1970s, but since the early 1990s significant populations have re-established themselves after escapes from farms; the number of which has increased as the demand for wild boar meat has grown.
As in natural conditions, sounders in peri-urban areas are matriarchal, though males tend to be much less represented, and adults of both sexes can be up to 35% heavier than their forest-dwelling counterparts.
'''"Solitary boar"'''
Some subspecies sport a light coloured patch running backwards from the corners of the mouth.
''Apicius'' devotes a whole chapter to the cooking of boar meat, providing ten recipes involving roasting, boiling and what sauces to use.
Population estimates for the Forest of Dean are disputed as at the time that the DEFRA population estimate was 100, a photo of a boar sounder in the forest near Staunton with over 33 animals visible was published, and at about the same time over 30 boar were seen in a field near the original escape location of Weston under Penyard many miles away.
''affinis'' (Gray, 1847), ''aipomus'' (Gray, 1868), ''aipomus'' (Hodgson, 1842), ''bengalensis'' (Blyth, 1860), ''indicus'' (Gray, 1843), ''isonotus'' (Gray, 1868), ''isonotus'' (Hodgson, 1842), ''jubatus'' (Miller, 1906), ''typicus'' (Lydekker, 1900), ''zeylonensis'' (Blyth, 1851)
'''Banded pig'''''S.
The animal would then be dispatched with a ''venabulum'', a short spear with a crossguard at the base of the blade.
In two rare cases, boars were reported to gore a small tiger and a tigress to death in self-defense.
It is absent in the dry regions of Mongolia from 44–46°N southward, in China westward of Sichuan and in India north of the Himalayas.
'Sow', the traditional name for a female, again comes from Old English and Germanic; it stems from Proto-Indo-European, and is related to the Latin ''sus'' and Greek ''hus'' and more closely to the modern German ''Sau''.
By 1960, they reached Leningrad and Moscow, and by 1975 they were to be found in Archangelsk and Astrakhan.
Colour is highly variable; specimens around Lake Balkhash are very lightly coloured, and can even be white, while some boars from Belarus and Ussuriland can be black.
Populations estimates were as follows:
Boars of all ages were once the primary prey of tigers in Transcaucasia, Kazakhstan, Middle Asia and the Far East up until the late 19th century.
Once ready to reproduce, males travel long distances in search of a sounder of sows, eating little on the way.
'''Grand old boar'''
The animal's head is very large, taking up to one third of the body's entire length.
Wolves primarily target piglets and subadults, and only rarely attack adult sows.
A small, almost maneless, yellowish-brown subspecies
The structure of the head is well suited for digging.
Most meat-dressing organisations agree that a boar carcass should yield  of meat on average.
Populations living on the outskirts of towns or farms can dig up potatoes and damage melons, watermelons and maize.
However, in Iran's Sarigol National Park, boars are the second most frequently targeted prey species after mouflon, though adult individuals are generally avoided, as they are above the leopard's preferred weight range of .
Its head is larger and more pointed than that of ''S.
This is in contrast to the Caucasian and Transcaucasian mountain areas, where boars will occupy such fruit-bearing forests year-round.
Several wild boars from Leon Springs and the San Antonio, Saint Louis and San Diego Zoos were released in the Powder Horn Ranch in Calhoun County, Texas, in 1939.
More than their Greek predecessors, the Romans extensively took inspiration from boarhunting in their art and sculpture.
'''Maremman boar'''''S.
In the Baltic regions, heavy snowfall can allow wolves to eliminate boars from an area almost completely.
The average litter consists of 4-6 piglets, with the maximum being 10-12.
''falzfeini'' (Matschie, 1918)
Remains of pigs have been dated to earlier than 11,400 BC in Cyprus.
Many other sightings, across the UK, have also been reported.
Young animals are vulnerable to helminths like ''Metastrongylus'', which are consumed by boars through earthworms, and cause death by parasitising the lungs.
The initial introductions took place in fenced enclosures, though several escapes occurred, with the escapees sometimes intermixing with already established feral pig populations.
Cultures throughout Europe and Asia Minor saw the killing of a boar as proof of one's valor and strength.
Pure wild boar populations may still be present, but are extremely localised.
'''North African boar'''''S.
These represent four separate, independent mutations.
In the mountainous areas of the Russian Far East, the species inhabits nutpine groves, hilly mixed forests where Mongolian oak and Korean pine are present, swampy mixed taiga and coastal oak forests.
In Buryat mythology, the forefathers of the Buryats descended from heaven and were nourished by a boar.
The breeding period in most areas lasts from November to January, though most mating only lasts a month and a half.
With the exception of ''S.
'''Ussuri boar'''''S.
The animal probably originated in Southeast Asia during the Early Pleistocene, and outcompeted other suid species as it spread throughout the Old World.
The winter coat consists of long, coarse bristles underlaid with short brown downy fur.
''sardous'' (Ströbel, 1882)
As of 2005, up to 16 subspecies are recognised, which are divided into four regional groupings based on skull height and lacrimal bone length.
DNA evidence from sub-fossil remains of teeth and jawbones of Neolithic pigs shows that the first domestic pigs in Europe had been brought from the Near East.
The species originally occurred in North Africa and much of Eurasia; from the British Isles to Korea and the Sunda Islands.
Forsyth Major, 1882
Charles I attempted to reintroduce the species into the New Forest, though this population was exterminated during the Civil War.
From Peninsular Malaysia, and in Indonesia from Sumatra and Java east to Komodo
The wild boar inhabits a diverse array of habitats from boreal taigas to deserts.
It has been suggested that some early myths surrounding the Welsh hero Culhwch involved the character being the son of a boar god.
The lower canines are much sharper and longer, with the exposed parts measuring  in length.
In 1902, 15-20 wild boar from Germany were released into a 3,200 hectare estate in Hamilton County, New York.
The head acts as a plow, while the powerful neck muscles allow the animal to upturn considerable amounts of soil: it is capable of digging  into frozen ground and can upturn rocks weighing .
Wild boar also carry parasites known to infect humans, including ''Gastrodiscoides'', ''Trichinella spiralis'', ''Taenia solium'', and ''Balantidium coli''.
'''Trans-baikal boar'''''S.
The piglets do not leave the lair for their first week of life.
s. davidi'' is low-skulled.
The grey wolf is the wild boar's main predator throughout most of its range except in the Far East and the Lesser Sunda Islands, where it is replaced by the tiger and Komodo dragon respectively.
Thirteen wild boar from Germany were purchased by Austin Corbin from Carl Hagenbeck, and released into a 9,500 hectare game preserve in Sullivan County.
As with the bear, Scottish and Welsh heraldry displays the boar's head with the neck cropped, unlike the English version, which retains the neck.
This association likely arose from aspects of the boar's actual nature.
These specimens escaped and established themselves in surrounding ranchlands and coastal areas, with some crossing the Espiritu Santo Bay and colonising Matagorda Island.
The Romans usually served boar meat with garum.
These resting places are occupied by whole families (though males lie separately), and are often located in the vicinity of streams, in swamp forests, in tall grass or shrub thickets.
Mongooses, honey badgers, hedgehogs, and pigs all have modifications to the receptor pocket which prevents the snake venom α-neurotoxin from binding.
File:Modern Pig-Sticking (1914) A. E. Wardrop I.png|Pigsticking in British India
The largest subspecies, it has usually dark hair and a white band extending from the corners of the mouth to the ears.
The English 'boar' stems from the Old English ''bar'', which is thought to be derived from the West Germanic ''*bairaz'', of unknown origin.
''anglicus'' (Reichenbach, 1846), ''aper'' (Erxleben, 1777), ''asiaticus'' (Sanson, 1878), ''bavaricus'' (Reichenbach, 1846), ''campanogallicus'' (Reichenbach, 1846), ''capensis'' (Reichenbach, 1846), ''castilianus'' (Thomas, 1911), ''celticus'' (Sanson, 1878), ''chinensis'' (Linnaeus, 1758), ''crispus'' (Fitzinger, 1858), ''deliciosus'' (Reichenbach, 1846), ''domesticus'' (Erxleben, 1777), ''europaeus'' (Pallas, 1811), ''fasciatus'' (von Schreber, 1790), ''ferox'' (Moore, 1870), ''ferus'' (Gmelin, 1788), ''gambianus'' (Gray, 1847), ''hispidus'' (von Schreber, 1790), ''hungaricus'' (Reichenbach, 1846), ''ibericus'' (Sanson, 1878), ''italicus'' (Reichenbach, 1846), ''juticus'' (Fitzinger, 1858), ''lusitanicus'' (Reichenbach, 1846), ''macrotis'' (Fitzinger, 1858), ''monungulus'' (G. Fischer von Waldheim, 1814), ''moravicus'' (Reichenbach, 1846), ''nanus'' (Nehring, 1884), ''palustris'' (Rütimeyer, 1862), ''pliciceps'' (Gray, 1862), ''polonicus'' (Reichenbach, 1846), ''sardous'' (Reichenbach, 1846), ''scropha'' (Gray, 1827), ''sennaarensis'' (Fitzinger, 1858), ''sennaarensis'' (Gray, 1868), ''sennaariensis'' (Fitzinger, 1860), ''setosus'' (Boddaert, 1785), ''siamensis'' (von Schreber, 1790), ''sinensis'' (Erxleben, 1777), ''suevicus'' (Reichenbach, 1846), ''syrmiensis'' (Reichenbach, 1846), ''turcicus'' (Reichenbach, 1846), ''variegatus'' (Reichenbach, 1846), ''vulgaris'' (S. D. W., 1836), ''wittei'' (Reichenbach, 1846)
Several Greek myths use the boar as a symbol of darkness, death and winter.
Boar's head was the centrepiece of most medieval Christmas celebrations among the nobility.
There is intense competition between the piglets over the most milk-rich nipples, as the best fed young grow faster and have stronger constitutions.
''sahariensis'' (Heim de Balzac, 1937)
Dholes may also prey on boars, to the point of keeping their numbers down in northwestern Bhutan, despite there being many more cattle in the area.
Although the lactation period lasts 2.5-3.5 months, the piglets begin displaying adult feeding behaviours at the age of 2–3 weeks.
In the Białowieża Forest, the animal's primary habitat consists of well developed, broad-leaved and mixed forests, along with marshy mixed forests, with coniferous forests and undergrowths being of secondary importance.
A medium-sized, dark to rusty-brown haired subspecies with long and relatively narrow lacrimal bones
Wild boar were apparently already becoming rare by the 11th century, since a 1087 forestry law enacted by William the Conqueror punishes through blinding the unlawful killing of boar.
Boarhunting continued after the fall of the Western Roman Empire, though the Germanic tribes considered the red deer to be a more noble and worthy quarry.
File:Südindischer Meister um 1540 002.jpg|Southern Indian depiction of boar hunt, c. 1540
Domestic pigs tend to have much more developed hindquarters than their wild boar ancestors, to the point where 70% of their body weight is concentrated in the posterior, which is the opposite of wild boar, where most of the muscles are concentrated on the head and shoulders.
The foundation myth of Ephesus has the city being built over the site where prince Androklos of Athens killed a boar.
As of 2010, at least 44 cities in 15 countries have experienced problems of some kind relating to the presence of habituated wild boar.
With the exception of the canines in males, the teeth stop growing during the middle of the fourth year.
Once the initial attack is over, the boar steps back, takes position and attacks again if the victim is still moving, only ending once the victim is completely incapacitated.
''japonica'' (Nehring, 1885)
When frightened, boars make loud huffing ''ukh!
Romania, Hungary, Ukraine, Balkans, Caucasus, Transcaucasia, Caspian coast, Asia Minor and northern Iran
A similar attempt was made in Dorsetshire's Bere Wood, though these were again exterminated after one specimen injured a horse belonging to the sporting writer Charles James Apperley.
De Beaux and Festa, 1927
Adult size and weight is largely determined by environmental factors; boars living in arid areas with little productivity tend to attain smaller sizes than their counterparts inhabiting areas with abundant food and water.
Prior to the conversion to Islam, the Kyrgyz people believed that they were descended from boars, and thus did not eat pork.
Wild boar are known to be competent swimmers, capable of covering long distances.
Should danger be detected, the piglets take cover or stand immobile, relying on their camouflage to keep them hidden.
The programme prompted activist writer George Monbiot to propose a thorough population study, followed by the introduction of permit-controlled culling.
These back bristles form the aforementioned mane prominent in males, and stand erect when the animal is agitated.
Wild boar can thrive in captivity, though piglets grow slowly and poorly without their mothers.
A 'new breeding population' was also identified in Devon.
Boars of the ''vittatus'' subspecies in Ujung Kulon National Park in Java differ from most other populations by their primarily frugivorous diet, which consists of 50 different fruit species, especially figs, thus making them important seed dispersers.
A light coloured subspecies with black legs which, though varied in size, it is generally quite large, the lacrimal bones and facial region of the skull are shorter than those of ''S.
The lacrimal bones are shortened, but longer than those of ''S.
''nipponicus'' (Heude, 1899)
Males sport a roughly egg-sized sack near the opening of the penis, which collects urine and emits a sharp odour.
By the late Villafranchian, ''S.
Its closest wild relative is the bearded pig of Malacca and surrounding islands.
In the breeding period, males develop a coating of subcutaneous tissue, which may be  thick, extending from the shoulder blades to the rump, thus protecting vital organs during fights.
The '''wild boar''' (''Sus scrofa''), also known as the '''wild swine''' or '''Eurasian wild pig''', is a suid native to much of Eurasia, North Africa, and the Greater Sunda Islands.
''canescens'' (Heude, 1888), ''continentalis'' (Nehring, 1889), ''coreanus'' (Heude, 1897), ''gigas'' (Heude, 1892), ''mandchuricus'' (Heude, 1897), ''songaricus'' (Heude, 1897)
Forests made up entirely of oak groves and beech are used only during the fruit-bearing season.
The piglets are whelped in a nest constructed from twigs, grasses and leaves.
Wild boar of unknown origin were stocked in a ranch in Edwards Plateau in the 1940s, only to escape during a storm and hybridise with local feral pig populations, later spreading into neighbouring counties.
The reconstructed northern boundary of the animal's Asian range ran from Lake Ladoga (at 60°N) through the area of Novgorod and Moscow into the southern Urals, where it reached 52°N.
Studies have shown that piglets imitate the sounds of their mother, thus different litters may have unique vocalisations.
Within this range, it was only absent in extremely dry deserts and alpine zones.
In early 2010 the Forestry Commission embarked on a cull, with the aim of reducing the boar population from an estimated 150 animals to 100.
It has a long history of association with humans, having been the ancestor of most domestic pig breeds and a big-game animal for millennia.
One example is the story of the youthful Adonis, who is killed by a boar and is permitted by Zeus to depart from Hades only during the spring and summer period.
The first of these introductions occurred in New Hampshire in 1890.
Maremma (central Italy)
The canines in old males continue to grow throughout their lives, curving strongly as they age.
In Western and Central Europe, the largest males weigh  and females .
The growth of urban areas and corresponding decline in natural boar habitats has led to some sounders entering human habitations in search of food.
In Sikhote Alin, a tiger can kill 30-34 boars a year.
In the more productive areas of Eastern Europe, males average  in weight,  in shoulder height and  in body length, while females weigh , reach  in shoulder height and  in body length.
These subspecies have sparse or absent underwool, with long manes and prominent bands on the snout and mouth.
Large specimens can yield  of fat, with some giants yielding  or more.
This may now be the largest population as it is expanding rapidly.
The boar as a warrior also appears in Scandinavian, Germanic and Anglo-Saxon culture, with its image having been frequently engraved on helmets, shields and swords.
s. majori'' habitats.
A 1998 MAFF (now DEFRA) study on wild boar living wild in Britain confirmed the presence of two populations of wild boar living in Britain; one in Kent/East Sussex and another in Dorset.
s. davidi'', it is more lightly built than ''S.
Boars are regularly encountered in pistachio groves in winter in some areas of Tajikistan and Turkmenia, while in spring they migrate to open deserts; boar have also colonised deserts in several areas they have been introduced to.
s. moupinensis'', and the mane is largely absent.
The region behind the shoulder blades rises into a hump, and the neck is short and thick, to the point of being nearly immobile.
During the Renaissance, when deforestation and the introduction of firearms reduced boar numbers, boarhunting became the sole prerogative of the nobility, one of many charges brought up against the rich during the German Peasants' War and the French Revolution.
