The marriage produced two daughters, Eva (1924–2008) and Lore (b.
They were examples of what he called "character armour" (''Charakterpanzer''), repetitive patterns of behaviour, speech and body posture that served as defence mechanisms.
A huge truck with three to help was hired.
According to Danto, he was well-regarded for the weekly technical seminars he chaired at the Ambulatorium, where he gave papers on his theory of character structure, arguing that psychoanalysis should be based on the examination of unconscious character traits, later known as ego defences.
Reich argued that conceiving of the orgasm as nothing but mechanical tension and relaxation could not explain why some experience pleasure and others do not.
He began teaching at The New School, where he remained until May 1941, living first at 7502 Kessel Street, Forest Hills, Queens, where he conducted experiments on mice with cancer, injecting them with bions.
He wrote that in all these circumstances the temperature difference remained, and was in fact more marked in the open air.
), ''Passion of Youth: An Autobiography, 1897–1922''.
After threatening to go on hunger strike he was released, on 5 January, but his name remained on the "key figures list" of the Enemy Alien Control Unit, which meant he was placed under surveillance.
analyst's response.
Hoff was married to another former student and patient of his, the psychologist Myron Sharaf, who decades later, with his ''Fury on Earth'' (1983), became Reich's main biographer.
I felt like people who, when they are to be executed, are made to dig their own graves first and are then shot and thrown in.
Peter visited him in jail several times, where one prisoner said Reich was known as the "flying saucer guy" and the "Sex Box man."
* ''Contact with Space: Oranur Second Report, 1951–1956'', 1957
In 1937 the Norwegian pathologist Leiv Kreyberg was allowed to examine one of Reich's bion preparations under a microscope.
Similarly, Sandor Rado had Reich as an analyst and in 1931 and declared him schizophrenic "in the most serious way."
I might even voice the belief that the schizophrenic form of psychic illness is regularly accompanied by illuminating insight into the irrationalism of social and political mores.
He joined the Communist Party of Germany, but grew impatient over their delay in publishing one of his pamphlets, '''' (1932), published in English as ''The Sexual Struggle of Youth'' (1972).
Turner writes that Reich underwent a political and existential crisis in Davos; he returned home in the spring angry and paranoid, according to Annie Reich.
During his time in Norway, Reich attempted to ground his orgasm theory in biology, exploring whether Freud's metaphor of the libido was in fact electricity or a chemical substance, an argument Freud had proposed in the 1890s but had abandoned.
He would also ask them to simulate physically the effects of certain emotions in the hope of triggering them.
Speaking to Christopher Turner in 2011, Reich's son, Peter, said of his father, "He was a nineteenth-century scientist; he wasn't a twentieth-century scientist.
* ''The Sexual Revolution'', 1945 (''Die Sexualität im Kulturkampf'', translated by Theodore P. Wolfe)
The FDA assigned an investigator to the case, who learned that Reich had built 250 accumulators.
Reich was still in love with Lindenberg, but Ollendorf started organizing his life for him, becoming his bookkeeper and laboratory assistant.
From 1960, apparently in response to the book burning, the New York publisher Farrar, Straus and Giroux began republishing his major works.
Sharaf writes that Reich detested unannounced visitors; he had once chased some people away with a gun just for looking at an adjacent property.
It is, in fact, ''the'' cosmic energy.
Hoff and Sharaf had had their first child the year before Hoff left him for Reich; the marriage was never repaired although the affair had ended by June 1955.
Hawkwind's song "Orgone Accumulator," on their album ''Space Ritual'' (1973) is named for his invention, as is Love Camp 7's "Orgone Box" (1997).
There were inaccurate rumours from the late 1920s that he had been hospitalized.
''Tidens Tegn'', a leading liberal newspaper, launched a campaign against him in 1937, supported by scientists and other newspapers.
:* Mary Boyd Higgins (ed.
From at least early 1954, he came to believe that the planet was under attack by UFOs, or "energy alphas," as he called them.
Einstein replied that he could not devote any further time to the matter and asked that his name not be misused for advertising purposes.
One of the volunteers was a young Willy Brandt, the future chancellor of Germany.
The government declined to extend his visa, and the couple had to move briefly back to Denmark, Reich under an assumed name.
*''Sexualerregung und Sexualbefriedigung'', Münster Verlag, 1929
She claimed, falsely, that he had said the accumulators could cure not only impotence but cancer.
He applied for a presidential pardon in May, to no avail.
* ''The Discovery of Orgone, Volume 2'': ''The Cancer Biopathy'', 1948
Reich wrote in his diary: "I never saw either my homeland or my possessions again.
Reich published ''Die Funktion des Orgasmus'' ("The Function of the Orgasm") in 1927, dedicating it to Freud.
Reich argued that the psychoanalytic taboos reinforced the neurotic taboos of the patient, and that he wanted his patients to see him as human.
Kreyberg accused Reich of being ignorant of basic bacteriological and anatomical facts, while Reich accused Kreyberg of having failed to recognize living cancer cells under magnification.
In 1947, a security investigation concluded that neither the Orgone Project nor any of its staff were engaged in subversive activities or were in violation of any statute within the jurisdiction of the FBI.
He is not only eloquent, he also keeps his listeners spellbound by his sparking personality, reflected in his small, dark eyes.
* ''Record of a Friendship: The Correspondence of Wilhelm Reich and A.S. Neill (1936–1957)'', 1981
He replied "that thick?"
He believed that it could unblock orgone energy in the atmosphere and cause rain.
Reich wrote later of this period:
Later that year, Theodore P. Wolfe, a professor of psychiatry at Columbia University, traveled to Norway to study under Reich.
For Reich, character structure was the result of social processes, in particular a reflection of castration and Oedipal anxieties playing themselves out within the nuclear family.
*'' Was ist Klassenbewußtsein?
He wrote in his book ''The Cancer Biopathy'' (1948) that he had found T-bacilli in rotting cancerous tissue obtained from a local hospital, and when injected into mice they caused inflammation and cancer.
The Austrian-American philosopher Paul Edwards said that the FDA's pursuit of Reich had intensified Edwards' attachment to him.
His subsequent involvement in a conference promoting adolescent sexuality caused the party to announce that it would no longer publish his material.
Reich responded with a 25-page letter in which he tried to change Einstein's mind.
The first human-sized, five-foot-tall box was built in December 1940, and set up in the basement of his house.
: Über die Neuformierung der Arbeiterbewegung'', 1934
He arrived with nothing in a city with little to offer; the overthrow of the Austria-Hungarian empire a few weeks earlier had left the newly formed Republic of German-Austria in the grip of famine.
The boxes had multiple layers of these materials, which caused the orgone concentration inside the box to be three to five times stronger than in the air, Reich said.
He issued a press release, but no one published it.
His second wife, Ilse Ollendorf, said vegetotherapy replaced the psychoanalytic method of never touching a patient with "a physical attack by the therapist."
Reich's daughter, Lore Reich Rubin, a psychiatrist, believed that he was bipolar and had been sexually abused as a child.
He told the inspectors they had to read his work before he would interact with them, and ordered them to leave.
Reich was much encouraged by the meeting and hoped he would be invited to join Princeton's Institute for Advanced Study.
He developed a delusion that he had powerful friends in government, including President Eisenhower, who he believed would protect him, and that the U.S. Air Force was flying over Orgonon to make sure that he was all right.
*"Die therapeutische Bedeutung der Genitallibido" ("The Therapeutic Importance of Genital Libido"), and "Über Genitalität vom Standpunkt der psa.
He first presented the principles of what he called character-analytic vegetotherapy in August 1934, in a paper entitled "Psychischer Kontakt und vegetative Strömung" ("Psychological Contact and Vegetative Current") at the 13th International Congress of Psychoanalysis at Lucerne, Switzerland.
On 12 December 1941, five days after Pearl Harbor and the day after Germany declared it was at war with the United States, Reich was arrested in his home at 2 a.m. by the FBI and taken to Ellis Island, where he was held for over three weeks.
There was no denying the principle of creative power governing life; only it was not satisfactory as long as it was not tangible, as long as it could not be described or practically handled.
When Reich requested a detailed control study, Kreyberg responded that his work did not merit it.
The attention of the FDA triggered belligerent responses from Reich, who called them "HiGS" (hoodlums in government) and the tools of red fascists.
Several well-known figures used orgone accumulators, including Orson Bean, Sean Connery, Allen Ginsberg, Paul Goodman, Jack Kerouac, Isaac Rosenfeld, J. D. Salinger, William Steig and Robert Anton Wilson.
In 1929 his article "Dialectical Materialism and Psychoanalysis" was published in ''Unter dem Banner des Marxismus'', the German Communist Party journal.
Reich described the oscillograph experiments in 1937 in ''Experimentelle Ergebniße Über Die Elektrische Funktion von Sexualität und Angst'' (''The Bioelectrical Investigation of Sexuality and Anxiety'').
Reich refused to appear in court, arguing that no court was in a position to evaluate his work.
(Silvert committed suicide in May 1958, five months after his release.)
Reichian physicians organized study groups.
Sharaf argued that psychoanalysts tended to dismiss as ill anyone from within the fold who had transgressed, and this was never done so relentlessly as with Reich.
Turner wrote that several children who were treated by OIRC therapists later said they had been sexually abused by the therapists, although not by Reich.
* ''The Invasion of Compulsory Sex-Morality'', 1951
My factual position in the case as well as in the world of science of today does not permit me to enter the case against the Food and Drug Administration, since such action would, in my mind, imply admission of the authority of this special branch of the government to pass judgment on primordial, pre-atomic cosmic orgone energy.
The FDA agents were not allowed to destroy them, only to supervise the destruction, so Reich's friends and his son, Peter, chopped them up with axes as the agents watched.
Reich joined the Austro-Hungarian Army during the First World War, serving from 1915 to 1918, for the last two years as a lieutenant at the Italian front with 40 men under his command.
He died in prison of heart failure just over a year later, days before he was due to apply for parole.
He came to be known as the "prophet of the better orgasm" and the "founder of a genital utopia."
Two months later Reich began another relationship, this time with Aurora Karrer, a medical researcher, and, in November, he moved out of Orgonon to an apartment in Alban Towers, Washington, D.C., to live with her, using the pseudonym Dr. Walter Roner.
With the tutor ordered out of the house, Reich was sent to an all-male gymnasium in Czernowitz.
He wrote several times to J. Edgar Hoover, director of the FBI, requesting a meeting, and appealed to the  Supreme Court, which decided on 25 February 1957 not to review the case.
According to Danto, Reich sought out patients at the Ambulatorium who had been diagnosed as psychopaths, believing that psychoanalysis could free them of their rage.
His behaviour took its toll on their relationship, and when Reich asked her to accompany him to the United States, she said no.
Reich was given his visa, but a royal decree was issued stipulating that anyone wanting to practice psychoanalysis needed a licence, and it was understood that Reich would not be given one.
If the session worked, he would see waves of pleasure move through their bodies, which he called the "orgasm reflex."
Wolfe and Walter Briehl, a former student of Reich's, put up $5,000 to guarantee his visa.
At some point the deadly T-bacilli start to form in the cells.
All the expenses and labor had to be provided by the Orgone Institute Press.
Even after the divorce, he suspected her of having affairs, and persuaded her to sign confessions about her feelings of fear and hatred toward him, which he locked away in the archives of his Orgone Institute.
He also developed sexual fantasies about his mother, writing when he was 22 that he masturbated while thinking about her.
Reich failed to appear for roll call on 3 November 1957 and was found at 7 a.m. in his bed, fully clothed but for his shoes.
Reich's first book, '''' ("The Impulsive Character: A Psychoanalytic Study of the Pathology of the Self"), was published in 1925.
Reich wrote about the affair in 1920 in his first published paper, "Über einen Fall von Durchbruch der Inzestschranke" ("About a Case of Breaching the Incest Taboo"), presented in the third person as though about a patient.
He observed an increase of temperature, which Reich argued was caused by orgone.
I know, Pete, that you are strong and decent.
According to Sharaf, the FDA suspected a sexual racket of some kind; questions were asked about the women associated with orgonomy and "what was done with them."
One woman said she was assaulted by one of Reich's associates when she was five years old.
From 1930 onwards, Reich began to treat patients outside the limits of psychoanalysis's restrictions.
:* Mary Boyd Higgins (ed.
In Bob Dylan's "Joey" from ''Desire'' (1975), the eponymous gangster spends his time in prison reading Nietzsche and Reich.
Death from cancer, he believed, was caused by an overwhelming growth of the T-bacilli.
Turner writes that the evil Dr. Durand Durand in the feature film ''Barbarella'' (1968) seems to be based on Reich; he places Barbarella (Jane Fonda) in his Excessive Machine so that she dies of pleasure, but rather than killing her the machine burns out.
in four years instead of six, and graduated in July 1922.
On 23 August six tons of Reich's books, journals and papers were burned in New York, in the Gansevoort incinerator, the public incinerator on 25th Street.
Reich and Lindenberg left for Vienna the next day.
In October 1939 his secretary Gertrud Gaasland introduced him to Ilse Ollendorf, 29 years old at the time.
In the Middle Ages, this man would have been sent into exile.
Sharaf writes that the opposition to his work affected his personality and relationships.
In March 1933 Freud told him that his contract with the International Psychoanalytic Publishers to publish ''Character Analysis'' had been cancelled.
The American Civil Liberties Union issued a press release criticizing the book burning, although coverage of the release was poor, and Reich ended up asking them not to help because he was annoyed that they had failed to criticize the destruction of the accumulators.
*"Eine hysterische Psychose in statu nascendi" ("Hysterical Psychosis in Statu Nascendi"), ''Internationale Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse'', XI, 1925
*''Massenpsychologie des Faschismus'', 1933
On 23 July the remaining accumulators in New York were destroyed by S. A. Collins and Sons, who had built them.
According to Turner, a nurse complained in 1952 to the New York Medical Society that an OIRC therapist had taught her five-year-old son how to masturbate.
I am kind of "above things," fully aware of what is up.
On 12 March 1957 Reich and Silvert were sent to Danbury Federal Prison.
In 2000 it released 789 pages of the file:
She later committed suicide and Reich blamed himself.
But according to Sharaf, they came to consider Reich as paranoid and belligerent.
He wrote of regular visits to brothels, the first when he was 15, and said he was visiting them daily from the age of around 17.
Representing himself during the hearing, he admitted the violation but pleaded not guilty and hinted at conspiracies.
In the end, he did tell his father, and after a protracted period of beatings, his mother committed suicide in 1910, for which Reich blamed himself.
During their next meeting, he gave Einstein a small accumulator, and over the next 10 days Einstein performed experiments with it in his basement, which involved taking the temperature above, inside and near the device, and stripping it down to its Faraday cage to compare temperatures.
Kate Bush's single "Cloudbusting" (1985) described Reich's arrest through the eyes of his son, Peter, who wrote his father's story in ''A Book of Dreams'' (1973).
The video for the song features Donald Sutherland as Reich and Bush as Peter.
* Reich's autobiographical writings in four volumes:
The jury found him guilty on 7 May 1956, and he was sentenced to two years' imprisonment.
Despite Reich's precarious mental health, his work on character and the idea of muscular armouring contributed to the development of what is now known as ego psychology, gave rise to body psychotherapy, and helped shape the Gestalt therapy of Fritz Perls, the bioenergetic analysis of Reich's student Alexander Lowen, and the primal therapy of Arthur Janov.
To Lindenberg's great distress, Sharaf writes, Reich insisted on an abortion, at that time illegal.
Reich lived on soup, oats and dried fruit from the university canteen, and shared an unheated room with his brother and another undergraduate, wearing his coat and gloves indoors to stave off the cold.
The earliest boxes were for laboratory animals.
He wrote in 1928 to another psychoanalyst, Dr. Lou Andreas-Salomé:
*''Die Sexualität im Kulturkampf: Zur sozialistischen Umstrukturierung des Menschen'', 1936
Reich also took measurements from the patients of a psychiatric hospital near Oslo, including catatonic patients, with the permission of the hospital's director.
Meetings were held in the basement of his house in Forest Hills.
Robert Anton Wilson's play, ''Wilhelm Reich in Hell'' (1987), is about Reich's confrontation with the American government.
* ''The Bion Experiments: On the Origin of Life'', Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1979 (''Die Bione: Zur Entstehung des vegetativen Lebens'')
* ''People in Trouble (The Emotional Plague of Mankind)'', 1953 (''Menschen im Staat'')
Armed with two cloudbusters, they fought what Reich called a "full-scale interplanetary battle" in Arizona, where he had rented a house as a base station.
This was one of the central theoretical statements of his Marxist period, which included ''The Imposition of Sexual Morality'' (1932), ''The Sexual Struggle of Youth'' (1932), ''The Mass Psychology of Fascism'' (1933), “What is Class Consciousness?” (1934) and ''The Sexual Revolution'' (1936).
The material included copies of several of his books, including ''The Sexual Revolution'', ''Character Analysis'' and ''The Mass Psychology of Fascism''.
*''Rede an den kleinen Mann'', 1945
During a recess the judge apparently suggested a psychiatric evaluation to Reich's ex-wife, Ilse Ollendorff, but this was not communicated to Reich.
), ''American Odyssey: Letters and Journals 1940–1947'', Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1999
* ''The Oranur Experiment: First Report (1947–1951)'', 1951
"Through these experiments I regard the matter as completely solved," he wrote to Reich on 7 February 1941.
* ''Ether, God and Devil'', 1949
A parole hearing had been scheduled for a few days before that date.
:* Mary Boyd Higgins and Chester M. Raphael (eds.
He was living with Lindenberg in Germany when Hitler became Chancellor in January 1933.
He called them "bions" and believed they were a rudimentary form of life, halfway between life and non-life.
He tried to find support among psychoanalysts in the UK so that he could settle there, and was interviewed in London by Ernest Jones, Melanie Klein, Joan Riviere and James Strachey.
He concluded that Reich's control measures to prevent infection from airborne bacteria were not as foolproof as Reich believed.
According to Sigurd Hoel, the analysis would stop because of the relationship, then the relationship would end and the analysis would start up again.
Reich's daughter, Lore Reich Rubin, told Turner that she believed her father was an abuser, although she did not say she had been abused by him, and she acknowledged that she had no evidence.
Reich offered a mixture of "psychoanalytic counseling, Marxist advice and contraceptives," Danto writes, and argued for a sexual permissiveness, including for young people and the unmarried, that unsettled other psychoanalysts and the political left.
In February 1954 the United States Attorney for the District of Maine filed a 27-page complaint seeking a permanent injunction under Sections 301 and 302 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to prevent interstate shipment of orgone accumulators and to ban promotional literature.
In a letter to Judge John D. Clifford, Jr. in February, he wrote:
when Reich handed it to him, and took two months to write a brief but positive letter in response, which Reich interpreted as a rejection.
In late 1954 Reich began an affair with Grethe Hoff, a former patient.
Brady argued that the "growing Reich cult" had to be dealt with.
He is an unhappy person&nbsp;... and I am afraid this will end in sickness."
''CORE – Cosmic Orgone Engineering'', 1954–1955
It is a kind of eschatological experience so frequently encountered in a pathological form in schizophrenics.
Several Norwegian scientists argued against an extension, Kreyberg saying, "If it is a question of handing Dr. Reich over to the Gestapo, then I will fight that, but if one could get rid of him in a decent manner, that would be the best."
It was revised and published in English in 1946 and 1949 as ''Character Analysis''.
Prognose und Libidotheorie."
It seems they left a strong impression on each other.
There were multiple complaints about his promotion of abortion, sex education, and the attempted suicide of a teenage patient.
*''Die Bione: Zur Entstehung des vegetativen Lebens'', Sexpol Verlag, 1938
Between March and December 1938, more than 165 articles or letters appeared in 13 Norwegian newspapers denouncing him.
Turner writes that it seems Reich was the victim of mistaken identity; there was a William Reich who ran a bookstore in New Jersey, which was used to distribute Communist material.
He maintained that his first sexual experience was at the age of four when he tried to have sex with the family maid (with whom he shared a bed), that he would regularly watch the farm animals have sex, that he used a whip handle sexually on the horses while masturbating, and that he had almost daily sexual intercourse from the age of 11 with another of the servants.
James Strick began studying Reich's laboratory notebooks from the 1935–1939 bion experiments in Norway.
He wrote in 1977 that for years he and his friends regarded Reich as "something akin to a messiah."
The psychiatrist Victor Sobey (d. 1995), an associate of Reich's, wrote:
When she became pregnant in 1935, they were initially overjoyed, buying clothes and furniture for the child, but doubts developed for Reich, who saw the future as too unsettled.
He moved to New York in 1939, in part to escape the Nazis, and shortly after arriving coined the term "orgone"&nbsp;– from "orgasm" and "organism"&nbsp;– for a biological energy he said he had discovered, which he said others called God.
Reich wrote in his diary that the mother had been attracted to him and had made the allegation to damage him.
Reich claimed he had shot several of them down.
Kreyberg alleged that "Mr. Reich" knew less about bacteria and anatomy than a first-year medical student.
He was buried in a vault at Orgonon that he had asked his caretaker to dig in 1955.
According to a Danish newspaper in 1934:
He said he wanted to "attack the neurosis by its prevention rather than treatment."
Reich has not only discovered it; he has seen it, demonstrated it and named a town&nbsp;– Orgonon, Maine&nbsp;– after it.
Although these had been published in German before Reich ever discussed orgone, he had added mention of it to the English editions, so they were caught by the injunction.
They went to Berlin, where the psychoanalyst Edith Jacobson helped to arrange it.
* ''Listen, Little Man!
One of Reich's first patients was Lore Kahn, a 19-year-old woman with whom he had an affair.
Norway was proud of its intellectual tolerance, so the "Reich affair," especially following the country's 1936 expulsion of Leon Trotsky, put Nygaardsvold's government on the spot.
