Till she who burns with youth, and knows no fixed lot, is bound
After Basire complained to the Dean, the schoolboys' privilege was withdrawn.
Later, in addition to teaching Catherine to read and write, Blake trained her as an engraver.
Blake started engraving copies of drawings of Greek antiquities purchased for him by his father, a practice that was preferred to actual drawing.
John Middleton Murry notes discontinuity between ''Marriage'' and the late works, in that while the early Blake focused on a "sheer negative opposition between Energy and Reason", the later Blake emphasised the notions of self-sacrifice and forgiveness as the road to interior wholeness.
Poems such as "Why should I be bound to thee, O my lovely Myrtle-tree?"
This renunciation of the sharper dualism of ''Marriage of Heaven and Hell'' is evidenced in particular by the humanisation of the character of Urizen in the later works.
It also contained detailed explanations of his other paintings.
Blake was critical of the marriage laws of his day, and generally railed against traditional Christian notions of chastity as a virtue.
Blake met Catherine Boucher in 1782 when he was recovering from a relationship that had culminated in a refusal of his marriage proposal.
Blake was concerned about senseless wars and the blighting effects of the Industrial Revolution.
The number of prints and bound books that James and Catherine were able to purchase for young William suggests that the Blakes enjoyed, at least for a time, a comfortable wealth.
He attended school only long enough to learn reading and writing, leaving at the age of ten, and was otherwise educated at home by his mother Catherine Blake (''née'' Wright).
And there behold the Loom of Locke whose Woof rages dire
Not all readers of Blake agree upon how much continuity exists between Blake's earlier and later works.
However, Blake's relationship with Flaxman seems to have grown more distant after Blake's return from Felpham, and there are surviving letters between Flaxman and Hayley wherein Flaxman speaks ill of Blake's theories of art.
Plants fruits & beauty there.
Blake believed he was personally instructed and encouraged by Archangels to create his artistic works, which he claimed were actively read and enjoyed by the same Archangels.
Over time, Blake came to detest Reynolds' attitude towards art, especially his pursuit of "general truth" and "general beauty".
Regarding Blake's final poem "Jerusalem", she writes: "The promise of the divine in man, made in ''The Marriage of Heaven and Hell'', is at last fulfilled."
Because the project was never completed, Blake's intent may be obscured.
She believed she was regularly visited by Blake's spirit.
Ill shade him from the heat till he can bear,
Thus, the emphasis orthodoxy places upon the denial of bodily urges is a dualistic error born of misapprehension of the relationship between body and soul.
While Blake had a significant role to play in the art and poetry of figures such as Rossetti, it was during the Modernist period that this work began to influence a wider set of writers and artists.
In his poem "London" he speaks of "the Marriage-Hearse" plagued by "the youthful Harlot's curse", the result alternately of false Prudence and/or Harlotry.
His parents were interred in the same grounds.
The original wedding certificate may be viewed at the church, where a commemorative stained-glass window was installed between 1976 and 1982.
Gilchrist reports that a female lodger in the house, present at his expiration, said, "I have been at the death, not of a man, but of a blessed angel."
Many such as June Singer have argued that Blake's thoughts on human nature greatly anticipate and parallel the thinking of the psychoanalyst Carl Jung.
Present at the ceremonies were Catherine, Edward Calvert, George Richmond, Frederick Tatham and John Linnell.
Due to his visionary religious beliefs, he opposed the Newtonian view of the universe.
They teased him and one tormented him so much that Basire knocked the boy off a scaffold to the ground, "upon which he fell with terrific Violence".
And be like him and he will then love me.
The Abbey of his day was decorated with suits of armour, painted funeral effigies and varicoloured waxworks.
Some biographers have suggested that Blake tried to bring a concubine into the marriage bed in accordance with the beliefs of the more radical branches of the Swedenborgian Society, but other scholars have dismissed these theories as conjecture.
Blake experienced visions in the Abbey, he saw Christ and his Apostles and a great procession of monks and priests and heard their chant.
When she responded affirmatively, he declared, "Then I love you."
The 19th-century "free love" movement was not particularly focused on the idea of multiple partners, but did agree with Wollstonecraft that state-sanctioned marriage was "legal prostitution" and monopolistic in character.
From 1790 to 1800, William Blake lived in North Lambeth, London, at 13 Hercules Buildings, Hercules Road.
God wants not Man to Humble himself (55–61, E519–20)
Even so, they have evoked praise:
In Jung's own words: "Blake is a tantalizing study, since he compiled a lot of half or undigested knowledge in his fantasies.
Illuminated printing involved writing the text of the poems on copper plates with pens and brushes, using an acid-resistant medium.
Some indicators bolster the impression that Blake's illustrations in their totality would take issue with the text they accompany: In the margin of ''Homer Bearing the Sword and His Companions'', Blake notes, "Every thing in Dantes Comedia shews That for Tyrannical Purposes he has made This World the Foundation of All & the Goddess Nature & not the Holy Ghost."
Blake was cleared in the Chichester assizes of the charges.
Jesus, for Blake, symbolises the vital relationship and unity between divinity and humanity: "All had originally one language, and one religion: this was the religion of Jesus, the everlasting Gospel.
Also around this time (circa 1808), Blake gave vigorous expression of views on art in an extensive series of polemical annotations to the ''Discourses'' of Sir Joshua Reynolds, denouncing the Royal Academy as a fraud and proclaiming, "To Generalize is to be an Idiot".
Through Linnell he met Samuel Palmer, who belonged to a group of artists who called themselves the Shoreham Ancients.
He set up an independent exhibition in his brother's haberdashery shop at 27 Broad Street in Soho.
He was buried five days after his death – on the eve of his 45th wedding anniversary – at the Dissenter's burial ground in Bunhill Fields, in what is today in the Borough of Islington, London.
The group shared Blake's rejection of modern trends and his belief in a spiritual and artistic New Age.
To lean in joy upon our fathers knee.
His view of orthodoxy is evident in ''The Marriage of Heaven and Hell''.
John Linnell erased sexual imagery from a number of Blake's drawings.
Blake was reportedly in the front rank of the mob during the attack.
And then I'll stand and stroke his silver hair,
Northrop Frye, commenting on Blake's consistency in strongly held views, notes Blake "himself says that his notes on Joshua Reynolds, written at fifty, are 'exactly Similar' to those on Locke and Bacon, written when he was 'very Young'.
:'The Dante watercolours are among Blake's richest achievements, engaging fully with the problem of illustrating a poem of this complexity.
At a time of tremendous strain in his marriage, in part due to Catherine's apparent inability to bear children, he directly advocated bringing a second wife into the house.
William Blake was born on 28 November 1757 at 28 Broad Street (now Broadwick St.) in Soho, London.
They were often associated with beautiful religious themes and imagery, and may have inspired him further with spiritual works and pursuits.
Berger (more so than Swinburne) is especially sensitive to a shift in sensibility between the early Blake and the later Blake.
Blake married Catherine – who was five years his junior – on 18 August 1782 in St Mary's Church, Battersea.
In 1784 Blake composed his unfinished manuscript ''An Island in the Moon''.
On 8 October 1779, Blake became a student at the Royal Academy in Old Somerset House, near the Strand.
Blake believed the paintings of Sir Joshua Reynolds, which depict the naturalistic fall of light upon objects, were products entirely of the "vegetative eye", and he saw Locke and Newton as "the true progenitors of Sir Joshua Reynolds' aesthetic".
I turn my eyes to the Schools & Universities of Europe
On her death, Blake's manuscripts were inherited by Frederick Tatham, who burned some he deemed heretical or politically radical.
This close study of the Gothic (which he saw as the "living form") left clear traces in his style.
The Bible was an early and profound influence on Blake, and remained a source of inspiration throughout his life.
Blake illustrated ''Original Stories from Real Life'' (2nd edition, 1791) by Mary Wollstonecraft.
His words concerning religion in ''The Marriage of Heaven and Hell'':
Blake's death in 1827 cut short the enterprise, and only a handful of watercolours were completed, with only seven of the engravings arriving at proof form.
Schofield was later depicted wearing "mind forged manacles" in an illustration to ''Jerusalem''.
This mindset is reflected in an excerpt from Blake's ''Jerusalem'':
Blake had an enormous influence on the beat poets of the 1950s and the counterculture of the 1960s, frequently being cited by such seminal figures as beat poet Allen Ginsberg, songwriters Bob Dylan, Jim Morrison, Van Morrison, and English writer Aldous Huxley.
In 1793's ''Visions of the Daughters of Albion'', Blake condemned the cruel absurdity of enforced chastity and marriage without love and defended the right of women to complete self-fulfilment.
That God will torment Man in Eternity for following his Energies.
There is a series of 70 mosaics inspired by Blake in the nearby railway tunnels of Waterloo Station.
Psychoanalyst June Singer has written that Blake's late work displayed a development of the ideas first introduced in his earlier works, namely, the humanitarian goal of achieving personal wholeness of body and spirit.
The process is also referred to as illuminated printing, and the finished products as illuminated books or prints.
On the day of her death, in October 1831, she was as calm and cheerful as her husband, and called out to him "as if he were only in the next room, to say she was coming to him, and it would not be long now".
In the early 20th century, Pierre Berger described how Blake's views echo Mary Wollstonecraft's celebration of joyful authentic love rather than love born of duty, the former being the true measure of purity.
Even phrases and lines of verse will reappear as much as forty years later.
His visual artistry led one contemporary art critic to proclaim him "far and away the greatest artist Britain has ever produced".
Although he lived in London his entire life (except for three years spent in Felpham), he produced a diverse and symbolically rich ''œuvre'', which embraced the imagination as "the body of God" or "human existence itself".
'''William Blake''' (28 November 1757&nbsp;– 12 August 1827) was an English poet, painter, and printmaker.
Important early and mid twentieth-century scholars involved in enhancing Blake's standing in literary and artistic circles included S. Foster Damon, Geoffrey Keynes, Northrop Frye, David V. Erdman and G. E. Bentley, Jr.
Ankarsjö records Blake as having supported a commune with some sharing of partners, though David Worrall read ''The Book of Thel'' as a rejection of the proposal to take concubines espoused by some members of the Swedenborgian church.
*As the  chooses the fairest leaves to lay her eggs on, so the priest lays his curse on the fairest joys.
He'd have done anything to please us:
His poetry suggests that external demands for marital fidelity reduce love to mere duty rather than authentic affection, and decries jealousy and egotism as a motive for marriage laws.
At the same time, Blake shared Dante's distrust of materialism and the corruptive nature of power, and clearly relished the opportunity to represent the atmosphere and imagery of Dante's work pictorially.
Reynolds wrote in his ''Discourses'' that the "disposition to abstractions, to generalising and classification, is the great glory of the human mind"; Blake responded, in marginalia to his personal copy, that "To Generalize is to be an Idiot; To Particularize is the Alone Distinction of Merit".
Blake retained an active interest in social and political events throughout his life, and social and political statements are often present in his mystical symbolism.
Some poems from this period warn of dangers of predatory sexuality such as ''The Sick Rose''.
His prophetic works have been said to form "what is in proportion to its merits the least read body of poetry in the English language".
The riots, in response to a parliamentary bill revoking sanctions against Roman Catholicism, became known as the Gordon Riots and provoked a flurry of legislation from the government of George III, and the creation of the first police force.
A more recent (and very short) study, ''William Blake: Visionary Anarchist'' by Peter Marshall (1988), classified Blake and his contemporary William Godwin as forerunners of modern anarchism.
In heavy wreathes folds over every Nation; cruel Works
/ He who desires but acts not breeds pestilence."
Reverent of the Bible but hostile to the Church of England (indeed, to almost all forms of organised religion), Blake was influenced by the ideals and ambitions of the French and American Revolutions.
The exhibition was designed to market his own version of the Canterbury illustration (titled ''The Canterbury Pilgrims''), along with other works.
His experiences in Westminster Abbey helped form his artistic style and ideas.
Blake taught Catherine to write, and she helped him colour his printed poems.
Eventually, it is reported, he ceased working and turned to his wife, who was in tears by his bedside.
He then etched the plates in acid to dissolve the untreated copper and leave the design standing in relief (hence the name).
But humble as a Lamb or Ass,
After his father's death, Blake and former fellow apprentice James Parker opened a print shop in 1784, and began working with radical publisher Joseph Johnson.
Of life in weary lust?
If he had been Antichrist Creeping Jesus,
Irene Langridge notes that "in Blake's mysterious and unorthodox creed the doctrine of free love was something Blake wanted for the edification of 'the soul'."
Much of the central conceit of Philip Pullman's fantasy trilogy ''His Dark Materials'' is rooted in the world of Blake's ''The Marriage of Heaven and Hell''.
Most critical work has concentrated on Blake's relief etching as a technique because it is the most innovative aspect of his art, but a 2009 study drew attention to Blake's surviving plates, including those for the Book of Job: they demonstrate that he made frequent use of a technique known as "repoussage", a means of obliterating mistakes by hammering them out by hitting the back of the plate.
Much of his poetry recounts in symbolic allegory the effects of the French and American revolutions.
That Man has two real existing principles Viz: a Body & a Soul.
He read avidly on subjects of his own choosing.
''Visions of the Daughters of Albion'' is widely (though not universally) read as a tribute to free love since the relationship between Bromion and Oothoon is held together only by laws and not by love.
She continued selling his illuminated works and paintings, but entertained no business transaction without first "consulting Mr. Blake".
Blake's trouble with authority came to a head in August 1803, when he was involved in a physical altercation with a soldier, John Schofield.
In the long afternoons Blake spent sketching in the Abbey, he was occasionally interrupted by boys from Westminster School, who were allowed in the Abbey.
Some scholars have noted that Blake's views on "free love" are both qualified and may have undergone shifts and modifications in his late years.
At six that evening, after promising his wife that he would be with her always, Blake died.
I will not Reason & Compare; my business is to Create."
Blake employed intaglio engraving in his own work, most notably for the illustrations of the Book of Job, completed just before his death.
In particular, Blake is sometimes considered (along with Mary Wollstonecraft and her husband William Godwin) a forerunner of the 19th-century "free love" movement, a broad reform tradition starting in the 1820s that held that marriage is slavery, and advocated the removal of all state restrictions on sexual activity such as homosexuality, prostitution, and adultery, culminating in the birth control movement of the early 20th century.
Abstinence sows sand all over
When I from black and he from white cloud free,
His spiritual beliefs are evident in ''Songs of Experience'' (1794), in which he distinguishes between the Old Testament God, whose restrictions he rejected, and the New Testament God whom he saw as a positive influence.
(''Descriptive Catalogue'', Plate 39, E543)
Certainly, religious concepts and imagery figure centrally in Blake's works.
Of many Wheels I view, wheel without wheel, with cogs tyrannic
His paintings and poetry have been characterised as part of the Romantic movement and as "Pre-Romantic".
Tatham was an Irvingite, one of the many fundamentalist movements of the 19th century, and opposed to any work that smacked of blasphemy.
He abhorred self-denial, which he associated with religious repression and particularly sexual repression: "Prudence is a rich ugly old maid courted by Incapacity.
In 1818, he was introduced by George Cumberland's son to a young artist named John Linnell.
In 1957 a memorial to Blake and his wife was erected in Westminster Abbey.
Since his death, William Blake has been claimed by those of various movements who apply his complex and often elusive use of symbolism and allegory to the issues that concern them.
and must she drag the chain
In light of Blake's aforementioned sense of human 'fallenness' Ankarsjö thinks Blake does ''not'' fully approve of sensual indulgence merely in defiance of law as exemplified by the female character of Leutha, since in the fallen world of experience all love is enchained.
Throughout his life she proved an invaluable aid, helping to print his illuminated works and maintaining his spirits throughout numerous misfortunes.
Thomas Wright's 1928 book ''Life of William Blake'' (entirely devoted to Blake's doctrine of free love) notes that Blake thinks marriage should ''in practice'' afford the joy of love, but notes that in reality it often does not, as a couple's knowledge of being chained often diminishes their joy.
And round the tent of God like lambs we joy:
Blake's last years were spent at Fountain Court off the Strand (the property was demolished in the 1880s, when the Savoy Hotel was built).
Energy is Eternal Delight.
According to my ideas they are an artistic production rather than an authentic representation of unconscious processes."
After two years, Basire sent his apprentice to copy images from the Gothic churches in London (perhaps to settle a quarrel between Blake and James Parker, his fellow apprentice).
Catherine paid for Blake's funeral with money lent to her by Linnell.
Within these he describes a number of characters, including "Urizen", "Enitharmon", "Bromion" and "Luvah".
Although Blake was considered mad by contemporaries for his idiosyncratic views, he is held in high regard by later critics for his expressiveness and creativity, and for the philosophical and mystical undercurrents within his work.
Despite these known influences, the singularity of Blake's work makes him difficult to classify.
From a young age, William Blake claimed to have seen visions.
The preface to this work includes a poem beginning "And did those feet in ancient time", which became the words for the anthem "Jerusalem".
But the following Contraries to these are True
It has been speculated that Blake's instruction in this outmoded form may have been detrimental to his acquiring of work or recognition in later life.
Stereotype, a process invented in 1725, consisted of making a metal cast from a wood engraving, but Blake's innovation was, as described above, very different.
Beholding her, Blake is said to have cried, "Stay Kate!
He recounted the story of his heartbreak for Catherine and her parents, after which he asked Catherine, "Do you pity me?"
In a letter to Thomas Butts, dated 25 April 1803, Blake wrote:
It has somewhat more in common with early feminist movements (particularly with regard to the writings of Mary Wollstonecraft, whom Blake admired).
Blake's father, James, was a hosier.
Blake’s grave is commemorated by a stone that reads "Near by lie the remains of the poet-painter William Blake 1757–1827 and his wife Catherine Sophia 1762–1831".
They seem to have shared some views on sexual equality and the institution of marriage, but there is no evidence proving without doubt that they actually met.
On another occasion, Blake watched haymakers at work, and thought he saw angelic figures walking among them.
"I must Create a System, or be enslav'd by another Man's.
George Richmond gives the following account of Blake's death in a letter to Samuel Palmer:
Blake's first biographer, Alexander Gilchrist, records that in June 1780 Blake was walking towards Basire's shop in Great Queen Street when he was swept up by a rampaging mob that stormed Newgate Prison.
God and Christianity constituted the intellectual centre of his writings, from which he drew inspiration.
Energy is the only life and is from the Body and Reason is the bound or outward circumference of Energy.
Though all evidence suggests that his parents were largely supportive, his mother seems to have been especially so, and several of Blake's early drawings and poems decorated the walls of her chamber.
Over time, Blake began to resent his new patron, believing that Hayley was uninterested in true artistry, and preoccupied with "the meer drudgery of business" (E724).
David Bindman suggests that Blake's antagonism towards Reynolds arose not so much from the president's opinions (like Blake, Reynolds held history painting to be of greater value than landscape and portraiture), but rather "against his hypocrisy in not putting his ideals into practice."
On 4 August 1772, Blake was apprenticed to engraver James Basire of Great Queen Street, at the sum of £52.10, for a term of seven years.
In ''The Everlasting Gospel'', Blake does not present Jesus as a philosopher or traditional messianic figure, but as a supremely creative being, above dogma, logic and even morality:
and "Earth's Answer" seem to advocate multiple sexual partners.
Its only review, in ''The Examiner'', was hostile.
He did not hold with the doctrine of God as Lord, an entity separate from and superior to mankind; this is shown clearly in his words about Jesus Christ: "He is the only God ... and so am I, and so are you."
Blake's marriage to Catherine was close and devoted until his death.
While the terms of his study required no payment, he was expected to supply his own materials throughout the six-year period.
Gilchrist refers to "stormy times" in the early years of the marriage.
On the day of his death (12 August 1827), Blake worked relentlessly on his Dante series.
Blake's first collection of poems, ''Poetical Sketches'', was printed around 1783.
In ''Visions'', Blake writes:
This is a reversal of the usual method of etching, where the lines of the design are exposed to the acid, and the plate printed by the intaglio method.
Blake used illuminated printing for most of his well-known works, including ''Songs of Innocence and of Experience'', ''The Book of Thel'', ''The Marriage of Heaven and Hell'' and ''Jerusalem''.
During this period, Blake made explorations into poetry; his early work displays knowledge of Ben Jonson, Edmund Spenser, and the Psalms.
According to a report in the Sussex county paper, "The invented character of the evidence was ... so obvious that an acquittal resulted".
Murry characterises the later Blake as having found "mutual understanding" and "mutual forgiveness".
Swinburne notes how Blake's ''Marriage of Heaven and Hell'' condemns the hypocrisy of the "pale religious letchery" of advocates of traditional norms.
The final section of the expanded edition of her Blake study ''The Unholy Bible'' suggests the later works are the "Bible of Hell" promised in ''The Marriage of Heaven and Hell''.
Knowing Blake was too eccentric to produce a popular work, Cromek promptly commissioned Blake's friend Thomas Stothard to execute the concept.
Blake had a complex relationship with Enlightenment philosophy.
In 1800, Blake moved to a cottage at Felpham, in Sussex (now West Sussex), to take up a job illustrating the works of William Hayley, a minor poet.
However, the late poems also place a greater emphasis on forgiveness, redemption, and emotional authenticity as a foundation for relationships.
The exhibition was very poorly attended, selling none of the temperas or watercolours.
Against Reynolds' fashionable oil painting, Blake preferred the Classical precision of his early influences, Michelangelo and Raphael.
The mastery of watercolour has reached an even higher level than before, and is used to extraordinary effect in differentiating the atmosphere of the three states of being in the poem'.
The first may have occurred as early as the age of four when, according to one anecdote, the young artist "saw God" when God "put his head to the window", causing Blake to break into screaming.
In the 19th century, poet and free love advocate Algernon Charles Swinburne wrote a book on Blake drawing attention to the above motifs in which Blake praises "sacred natural love" that is not bound by another's possessive jealousy, the latter characterised by Blake as a "creeping skeleton".
