The following year, the court decided ''McGrain v. Daugherty''.
With no pension or other compensation to expect from the government after leaving the White House, Taft contemplated a return to the practice of law, from which he had long been absent.
It later emerged that Harding had also promised former Utah senator George Sutherland a seat on the Supreme Court, and was waiting in the expectation that another place would become vacant.
Vice President Sherman had been renominated at Chicago; seriously ill during the campaign, he died six days before the election, and was replaced on the ticket by the president of Columbia University, Nicholas Murray Butler.
After consulting with his family, Taft agreed, and sailed for the United States in December 1903.
Cass Gilbert had prepared plans for the building, and was hired by the government as architect.
McKinley was elected; when a place on the Supreme Court opened in 1898, the only one under McKinley, the president named Joseph McKenna.
Taft was opposed to the traditional practice of rewarding wealthy supporters with key ambassadorial posts, preferring that diplomats not live in a lavish lifestyle and selecting men who, as Taft put it, would recognize an American when they saw one.
Congress objected to some aspects, requiring Taft to get the agreement of the senior judge of each involved circuit before assigning a judge, but it in September 1922 passed the bill, and the Judicial Conference of Senior Circuit Judges held its first meeting that December.
Taft in his final annual message to Congress in December 1912 indicated that he was moving towards recognition once the republic was fully established, but by then he had been defeated for re-election and he did not follow through.
Roosevelt challenged Taft for renomination in 1912.
The general was forced to co-operate with Taft, as McKinley had given the commission control over the islands' military budget.
The Colombians felt the amount inadequate, and requested arbitration; the matter was not settled under the Taft administration.
Taft journeyed to Panama in 1904, viewing the canal site and meeting with Panamanian officials.
Alternatively, Taft wanted to be chief justice, and kept a close eye on the health of the aging incumbent, Melville Fuller, who turned 75 in 1908.
The resulting coverage of the presidential message relegated Hughes to the back pages.
The  Ballinger-Pinchot affair caused progressives and Roosevelt loyalists to feel that Taft had turned his back on Roosevelt's agenda.
Due to his years in the Philippines, Taft was keenly interested as president in Far Eastern affairs.
That company had been expanded under Roosevelt, who had supported its acquisition of the Tennessee Coal, Iron, and Railroad Company as a means of preventing the deepening of the Panic of 1907, a decision the former president defended when testifying at the hearings.
He sailed for home in April on the ''Titanic'' and died in its sinking, a death Taft found hard to accept as his body was not recovered.
As Roosevelt's administration had investigated International Harvester, but had taken no action (a decision Taft had supported), the suit became caught up in Roosevelt's challenge for the Republican presidential nomination.
When Taft arrived in Washington in February 1890, the office had been vacant two months, with the work piling up.
Returning to Washington after his resignation on February 3, Taft had barely enough strength to sign a reply to a letter of tribute from the eight associate justices.
According to Anderson, Taft as chief justice "was as aggressive in the pursuit of his agenda in the judicial realm as Theodore Roosevelt was in the presidential".
Lurie argued that Taft did not receive the public credit for his policies that he should have.
But few electors chose Taft and Butler, who won only Utah and Vermont, for a total of eight electoral votes.
In January 1900, Taft was called to Washington to meet with McKinley.
Taft continued and expanded Roosevelt's efforts to break up business combinations through lawsuits brought under the Sherman Antitrust Act, bringing 70 cases in four years (Roosevelt had brought 40 in seven years).
Taft replaced Roosevelt's minister there, William W. Rockhill, as uninterested in the China trade, with William J. Calhoun, whom McKinley and Roosevelt had sent on several foreign missions.
Taft, at Roosevelt's advice, ignored the issue.
The president issued a confident statement in September after the Republicans narrowly won Vermont's state elections in a three-way fight, but had no illusions he would win his race.
Nellie Taft said regarding the campaign, "There was nothing to criticize, except his not knowing or caring about the way the game of politics is played."
Taft told his military aide, Archibald Butt, that "I am going to sit on the lid and it will take a great deal to pry me off".
Taft believed Fuller likely to live many years.
Roosevelt gave a series of speeches in the West in the late summer and early fall of 1910.
Taft named Lurton anyway on December 13, 1909, and the Senate confirmed him by voice vote a week later.
He actively sought the appointment, writing to Foraker to urge the governor to press his case, while stating to others it was unlikely he would get it.
He did not retain Garfield, an Ohioan, as secretary, choosing instead a westerner, former Seattle mayor Richard A. Ballinger.
Ambivalent between his loyalties, Butt went to Europe on vacation in early 1912.
Inadequate compensation was paid to the shareholders, and these grievances were among those which touched off the Chinese Revolution of 1911.
Roosevelt had served almost three and a half years of McKinley's term.
The Chinese imperial government got the money for the indemnity from the British Hong Kong government, on condition British subjects would be favored if foreign capital was needed to build the railroad line, and in 1909, a British-led consortium began negotiations.
Taft is remembered as the heaviest president; he was  tall and his weight peaked at  toward the end of his presidency, though this later decreased, and he weighed by 1929 just .
After the election, Roosevelt continued to promote progressive ideals, a New Nationalism, much to Taft's dismay.
Taft remained involved in Philippine affairs.
He landed solidly in McKinley's camp after former Nebraska representative William Jennings Bryan in July stampeded the 1896 Democratic National Convention with his Cross of Gold speech.
In 1902, Clarence Cunningham, an Idaho entrepreneur, had found coal deposits in Alaska, and made mining claims, and the government investigated their legality.
This dragged on for the remainder of the Roosevelt administration, including during the year (1907–1908) when Ballinger served as head of the General Land Office.
There was objection on the West Coast when the treaty was submitted to the Senate, but Taft informed politicians that there was no change in immigration policy.
The death of Justice Rufus Peckham in October 1909 gave Taft his first opportunity.
Roosevelt used his control of the party machinery to aid his heir apparent.
The Senate confirmed Taft the same day, 61–4, without any committee hearings and after a brief debate in executive session.
In September 1909, Glavis made his allegations public in a magazine article, disclosing that Ballinger had acted as an attorney for Cunningham between his two periods of government service.
Taft made six appointments to the Supreme Court, the most of any president except George Washington and Franklin D. Roosevelt.
The Commerce Court, created in 1910, stemmed from a Taft proposal for a specialized court to hear appeals from the Interstate Commerce Commission.
Taft was born in Cincinnati in 1857.
Yet, a portrait of Taft as a victim of betrayal by his best friend is incomplete: as Coletta put it, "Was he a poor politician because he was victimized or because he lacked the foresight and imagination to notice the storm brewing in the political sky until it broke and swamped him?"
The White Court had, in 1918, struck down an attempt by Congress to regulate child labor in ''Hammer v. Dagenhart''.
There were U.S. concerns about the number of Japanese laborers coming to the West Coast, and during Taft's second visit, in September 1907, Tadasu Hayashi, the foreign minister, informally agreed to issue fewer passports to them.
A supporter of free immigration, Taft vetoed a bill passed by Congress and supported by labor unions that would have restricted unskilled laborers by imposing a literacy test.
Taft had control of the party machinery, and it came as no surprise that he gained the bulk of the delegates decided at district or state conventions.
Taft did not impose segregation at official events, and treated the Filipinos as social equals.
Taft wanted to have Filipino farmers to have a stake in the new government through land ownership, but much of the arable land was held by Catholic religious orders, priests who were mostly Spanish, and were often resented by the Filipinos.
Governor Woodrow Wilson was the Democratic nominee.
Roosevelt began to move into a position for a run in late 1911, writing that the tradition that presidents not run for a third term only applied to consecutive terms.
1'' (1889) if only because it was used against him when he ran for president in 1908.
Harding made no response, and Taft in a thank-you note reiterated the condition and stated that Chief Justice White had often told him he was keeping the position for Taft until a Republican held the White House.
Taft made it a priority to restructure the State Department, noting, "it is organized on the basis of the needs of the government in 1800 instead of 1900."
Congress thereafter attempted to end child labor by imposing a tax on certain corporations making use of it.
Senator Root agreed to give a single speech for him.
Taft was lobbying for himself behind the scenes, especially with the Ohio politicians who formed Harding's inner circle.
In October 1880, Taft was appointed assistant prosecutor for Hamilton County (where Cincinnati is located), and took office the following January.
By March 1896, Taft realized that McKinley would likely be nominated, and was lukewarm in his support.
This lack of flair marred Taft's presidency; according to Lurie, Taft "was boring—honest, likable, but boring".
Root made a crucial ruling, that although the contested delegates could not vote on their own seating, they could vote on the other contested delegates, a ruling that assured Taft's nomination, as the motion offered by the Roosevelt forces failed, 567—507.
Taft strongly defended Roosevelt's record in his addresses, and wrote of the president's successful but strenuous efforts to gain election, "I would not run for president if you guaranteed the office.
When Wilson proposed establishment of a League of Nations, with the League's charter part of the Treaty of Versailles, Taft expressed public support.
The feud continued on and off through 1911, a year in which there were few elections of significance.
'''William Howard Taft''' (September 15, 1857 – March 8, 1930) served as the 27th President of the United States (1909–1913) and as the 10th Chief Justice of the United States (1921–1930), the only person to have held both offices.
The commission took executive power in the Philippines on September 1, 1900; on July 4, 1901, Taft became civilian governor.
Pitney had a stronger anti-labor record than Taft's other appointments, and was the only one to meet opposition, winning confirmation by a Senate vote of 50—26.
And it was Roosevelt who engraved in public memory the image of Taft as a Buchanan-like figure, with a narrow view of the presidency which made him unwilling to act for the public good.
Taft's dissent in ''Adkins'' was rare both because he authored few dissents, and because it was one of the few times he took an expansive view of the police power of the government.
According to Coletta, "in troubled times in which the people demanded progressive change, he saw the existing order as good."
When Congress convened in December 1921, a bill was introduced for 24 new judges, to empower the chief justice to move judges temporarily to eliminate the delays, and to have him chair a body consisting of the senior appellate judge of each circuit.
Under Goethals, the project moved ahead smoothly.
He was out of step with his party, whose senators were not inclined to confirm the treaty.
Coletta deemed Taft to have had a solid record of bills passed by Congress, but felt he could have accomplished more with political skill.
Attorney General Wickersham objected that Lurton, a former Confederate soldier and a Democrat, was aged 65.
Nicaragua was in debt to foreign powers, and the U.S. was unwilling that an alternate canal route fall into the hands of Europeans.
Taft upset some progressives by choosing Hitchcock as Chairman of the Republican National Committee (RNC), placing him in charge of the presidential campaign.
The U.S. would not interfere in European affairs.
The day of the summit, Frederick Russell Burnham and a Texas Ranger captured and disarmed an assassin holding a palm pistol only a few feet of the two presidents.
He was devoted to his law school, and was deeply committed to legal education, introducing the case system to the curriculum.
For Roosevelt, questioning the matter went to his personal honesty.
High on his list for dismissal was the ambassador to France, Henry White, whom Taft knew and disliked from his visits to Europe.
The Isthmian Canal Commission had trouble keeping a chief engineer, and when in February 1907 John D. Stevens submitted his resignation, Taft recommended an army engineer, George W. Goethals.
He was initially a firm supporter of President Coolidge after Harding's death in 1923, but became disillusioned with Coolidge's appointments to office and to the bench; he had similar misgivings about Coolidge's successor, Herbert Hoover.
In April, Taft made a speaking tour, traveling as far west as Omaha before being recalled to go to Panama and straighten out another contested election.
Taft also appointed judges to various specialized courts, including the first five appointees each to the United States Commerce Court and the United States Court of Customs Appeals.
While Roosevelt was biased, he was not alone: every major newspaper reporter of that time who left reminiscences of Taft's presidency was critical of him.
Booker T. Washington felt that most blacks should be trained for industrial work, with only a few seeking higher education; W.E.B.
When he was sworn in on July 11, he became the first and to date only person to serve both as president and chief justice.
McKinley was assassinated in September 1901, and was succeeded by Theodore Roosevelt.
Justice David Josiah Brewer's death on March 28, 1910 gave Taft a second opportunity to fill a seat on the high court; he chose New York Governor Charles Evans Hughes.
As president of the League to Enforce Peace, Taft hoped to prevent war through an international association of nations.
The issue of prohibition of alcohol entered the campaign when in mid-September, Carrie Nation called on Taft and demanded to know his views.
He worked to eliminate the backlog, while simultaneously educating himself on federal law and procedure he had not needed as an Ohio state judge.
William Taft remained devoted to his wife throughout their almost 44 years of marriage.
The new president stated in his inaugural address that he had been honored to have been "one of the advisers of my distinguished predecessor" and to have had a part "in the reforms he has initiated.
There were a number of incidents in which Mexican rebels crossed the U.S. border to obtain horses and weapons; Taft sought to prevent this by ordering the army to the border areas for maneuvers.
He for the most part supported Roosevelt's policies.
'&nbsp;" Most commentators agree that as chief justice, Taft's most significant contribution was his advocacy for reform of the high court, urging and ultimately gaining improvement in the court's procedures and facilities.
After leaving office, Taft returned to Yale as a professor, continuing his political activity and working against war through the League to Enforce Peace.
They met again when Taft went to Washington in January 1902 to recuperate after two operations caused by an infection.
Moneyed interests, that is, capital, must also obey the law.
When the court reconvened on January 6, 1930, Taft had not returned to Washington, and two opinions were delivered by Van Devanter that Taft had drafted but had been unable to complete because of his illness.
In poor health, he resigned in February 1930.
In 1926, Taft wrote for a 6–3 majority in ''Myers v. United States'' that Congress could not require the president to get Senate approval before removing an appointee.
The U.S. would use force if necessary to enforce the Monroe Doctrine in the Americas.
#> to display a count on left side of graph,  use "left:20" to suppress the count, use "left:20"
In New Jersey, Democrat Woodrow Wilson was elected governor, and Harding lost his race in Ohio.
Taft was a supporter of settling international disputes by arbitration, and he negotiated treaties with Great Britain and with France  providing that differences be arbitrated.
After that meeting, the two signed  a memorandum, with Japan indicating it had no desire to invade the Philippines, and the U.S. that it did not object to Japanese control of Korea.
Congress had decreed a minimum wage for women in the District of Columbia.
Taft issued a tribute to the man he had appointed to the center seat, and waited and worried if he would be White's successor.
Lanza committed acts allegedly in violation of both state and federal law, and was first convicted in Washington state court, then prosecuted in federal district court.
Knox did not agree, and declined a suggestion that he go to Peking to view the facts on the ground.
Taft expressed unwillingness to change his position, and threatened to resign; Roosevelt hastily dropped the matter.
The Canadian Parliament, led by Prime Minister Sir Wilfrid Laurier, had deadlocked over the issue.
Brown resigned in 1905, Taft would not accept the seat although Roosevelt offered it, a position Taft held to when another seat opened in 1906.
He supported the right of labor to organize and strike, and he ruled against employers in several negligence cases."
In the end, Taft won by a comfortable margin.
By the time Taft nominated White and Van Devanter in December 1910, he had another seat to fill due to William Henry Moody's retirement because of illness; he named a Louisiana Democrat, Joseph R. Lamar, whom he had met while playing golf, and had subsequently learned had a good reputation as a judge.
Taft's opponent in the general election was Bryan, the Democratic nominee for the third time in four presidential elections.
The pleadings in the case had not been reviewed by Taft, and alleged that Roosevelt "had fostered monopoly, and had been duped by clever industrialists".
When Taft took office as Secretary of War in January 1904, he was not called upon to spend much time administering the army, which the president was content to do himself—Roosevelt wanted him as a troubleshooter in difficult situations, as a legal adviser, and to be able to give campaign speeches as he sought election in his own right.
According to Coletta, however, Knox was not a good diplomat, and had poor relations with the Senate, press, and many foreign leaders, especially those from Latin America.
I should be untrue to myself, to my promises, and to the declarations of the party platform on which I was elected if I did not make the maintenance and enforcement of those reforms a most important feature of my administration".
Taft called a special session of Congress to convene on March 15, 1909 to deal with the tariff question.
In late 1902, Taft had heard from Roosevelt that a seat on the Supreme Court would soon fall vacant on the resignation of Justice George Shiras, and Roosevelt desired that Taft fill it.
His health gradually declined over the near-decade of his chief justiceship, and he wrote in 1929, "I am older and slower and less acute and more confused.
In 1896, Taft became dean and Professor of Property at his ''alma mater'', the Cincinnati Law School, a post that required him to prepare and give two hour-long lectures each week.
Longtime White House usher Ike Hoover recalled that Taft came often to see Roosevelt during the campaign, but seldom between the election and Inauguration Day, March 4, 1909.
Lurie catalogued progressive innovations that took place under Taft, and argued that historians have overlooked them because Taft was not an effective political writer or speaker.
Roosevelt's supporters spread rumors that the president was in effect running Taft's campaign.
Roosevelt was surprised at the replacement, believing that Taft had promised to keep Garfield, and this change was one of the events that caused Roosevelt to realize that Taft would choose different policies.
The Senate quickly confirmed Hughes, but then Chief Justice Fuller died on July 4, 1910.
At the time Taft was inaugurated, the way forward for African Americans was debated by their leaders.
Inevitably linked with Roosevelt, Taft generally falls in the shadow of the flamboyant Rough Rider, who chose him to be president, and who took it away.
Taft and Secretary of State Knox had a strong relationship, and the president listened to his counsel on matters foreign and domestic.
MacArthur, until then the military governor, was relieved by General Adna Chaffee, who was designated only as commander of American forces.
After admission to the Ohio bar, Taft devoted himself to his job at the ''Commercial'' full-time.
He took leave from Yale to be co-chairman of the National War Labor Board, tasked with assuring industrial peace.
Taft and other members of the court lobbied for the bill in Congress, and the Judges' Bill became law in February 1925.
Suits brought against the Standard Oil Company and the American Tobacco Company, initiated under Roosevelt, were decided in favor of the government by the Supreme Court in 1911.
Specific legislation on trusts was needed to supplement the Sherman Antitrust Act.
The U.S. had Nicaragua accept a loan, and sent officials to ensure it was repaid from government revenues.
Many Americans in the Philippines viewed the locals as racial inferiors, but Taft wrote soon before his arrival, "we propose to banish this idea from their minds".
In 1904, Roosevelt made him  Secretary of War and he became Roosevelt's hand-picked successor.
During the 1920 election campaign, Taft supported the Republican ticket, Harding (by then a senator) and Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge; they were elected.
He died at his home in Washington on March 8, 1930.
By late the following year, Taft was able to show that the backlog was shrinking.
The couple had three children, of which the eldest, Robert, became a U.S. senator.
William Taft attended Yale and was a member of Skull and Bones secret society like his father, and after becoming a lawyer was appointed a judge while still in his twenties.
A conservative, each time he was defeated by a candidate backed by the more liberal Eastern Establishment wing of the party.
Taft returned to the islands in 1905, leading a delegation of congressmen, and again in 1907, to open the first Philippine Assembly.
After seeing a newspaper photo of Taft taking a large swing at a golf ball, Roosevelt warned him against candid shots.
Taft was afraid that Stone would be made chief justice; he did not resign until he had secured assurances from Hoover that Hughes would be the choice.
Taft attributed blame for the recent recession, the Panic of 1907, to stock speculation and other abuses, and felt some reform of the currency (the U.S. was on the gold standard) was needed to allow flexibility in the government's response to poor economic times.
The department's first in-service training program was established, and appointees spent a month in Washington before going to their posts.
There, Taft testified before the Senate Committee on the Philippines.
Taft in 1922 ruled for a unanimous court in ''Balzac v. Porto Rico''.
The outcome supported the right of parents to control the education of their children, but also, since the lead plaintiff (the society) ran Catholic schools, struck a blow for religious freedom.
Despite widespread speculation Taft would be the pick, Harding made no quick announcement.
Roosevelt dominated the primaries, winning 278 of the 362 delegates to the Republican National Convention in Chicago decided in that manner.
Controversies over conservation and over antitrust cases filed by the Taft administration served to further separate the two men.
He made some speeches supporting the treaties in October, but the Senate added amendments Taft could not accept, killing the agreements.
Reid remained in place until his 1912 death.
This occurred on October 3 in New York, but Roosevelt allowed only a handshake, and no words were exchanged.
Taft began the campaign on the wrong foot, fueling the arguments of those who said he was not his own man by traveling to Roosevelt's home at Sagamore Hill for advice on his acceptance speech, saying that he needed "the President's judgment and criticism".
As Roosevelt became more radical in his progressivism, Taft was hardened in his resolve to achieve re-nomination, as he was convinced that the progressives threatened the very foundation of the government.
Roosevelt had Taft go to Rome to negotiate with Pope Leo XIII, to purchase the lands and to arrange the withdrawal of the Spanish priests, with Americans replacing them and training locals as clergy.
Yet, Taft did not have things his own way: he had hoped his running mate would be a midwestern progressive like Iowa Senator Jonathan Dolliver, but instead  the convention named Congressman James S. Sherman of New York, a conservative.
The conference report passed both houses, and Taft signed it on August 6, 1909.
The country remained unstable, and after another coup in 1911 and more disturbances in 1912, Taft sent troops; though most were soon withdrawn, some remained as late as 1933.
Taft and his Secretary of State, Philander Knox, instituted a policy of Dollar Diplomacy towards Latin America, believing U.S. investment would benefit all involved, while keeping European influence away from areas subject to the Monroe Doctrine.
During Roosevelt's fifteen months beyond the Atlantic, from March 1909 to June 1910, neither man wrote much to the other.
The project went forward; Taft would dedicate the Lincoln Memorial as chief justice in 1922.
With World War I raging in Europe, Taft sent Wilson a note of support for his foreign policy in 1915.
Pinchot was dismissed, much to his delight, and he sailed for Europe to lay his case before Roosevelt.
In March 1892, Taft resigned as Solicitor General to resume his judicial career.
Such ties, Taft hoped, would promote world peace.
Taft noted that there is no restriction of the president's power to remove officials in the constitution.
Taft followed custom and remained in Washington, but Roosevelt went to Chicago to run his campaign and told his supporters in a speech, "we stand at Armageddon, and we battle for the Lord".
Seeing Roosevelt as the greater electoral threat, Wilson spent little time attacking Taft, arguing that Roosevelt had been lukewarm in opposing the trusts during his presidency, and that Wilson was the true reformer.
Few trusts had been broken up under Roosevelt (although the lawsuits received much publicity).
Taft defeated Bryan by 321 electoral votes to 162; however, he garnered just 51.6 percent of the popular vote.
''United States v. Lanza'' was one of a series of cases involving Prohibition.
Assistant Postmaster General Frank H. Hitchcock resigned from his office in February 1908 to lead the Taft effort.
