His last major tragedies, ''Antony and Cleopatra'' and ''Coriolanus'', contain some of Shakespeare's finest poetry and were considered his most successful tragedies by the poet and critic T. S. Eliot.
In 1613, Sir Henry Wotton recorded that ''Henry VIII'' "was set forth with many extraordinary circumstances of pomp and ceremony".
In the 20th and 21st centuries, his works have been repeatedly adapted and rediscovered by new movements in scholarship and performance.
In 1623, John Heminges and Henry Condell, two of Shakespeare's friends from the King's Men, published the First Folio, a collected edition of Shakespeare's plays.
The opening soliloquy of ''Richard III'' has its roots in the self-declaration of Vice in medieval drama.
He was replaced around 1600 by Robert Armin, who played roles such as Touchstone in ''As You Like It'' and the fool in ''King Lear''.
The 1616 edition of Ben Jonson's ''Works'' names him on the cast lists for ''Every Man in His Humour'' (1598) and ''Sejanus His Fall'' (1603).
In Shakespeare's late romances, he deliberately returned to a more artificial style, which emphasised the illusion of theatre.
Shakespeare continued to act in his own and other plays after his success as a playwright.
Shakespeare was buried in the chancel of the Holy Trinity Church two days after his death.
His plays remain highly popular, and are constantly studied, performed, and reinterpreted in diverse cultural and political contexts throughout the world.
In 1623, in conjunction with the publication of the First Folio, the Droeshout engraving was published.
As a result, critics of the time mostly rated Shakespeare below John Fletcher and Ben Jonson.
At the age of 18, Shakespeare married 26-year-old Anne Hathaway.
Shakespeare uses it, for example, to convey the turmoil in Hamlet's mind:
Influenced by Ovid's ''Metamorphoses'', the poems show the guilt and moral confusion that result from uncontrolled lust.
''Bleste be  spares thes stones,''
According to Shakespearean scholar James Shapiro, in ''Julius Caesar'' "the various strands of politics, character, inwardness, contemporary events, even Shakespeare's own reflections on the act of writing, began to infuse each other".
On 29 June, however, a cannon set fire to the thatch of the Globe and burned the theatre to the ground, an event which pinpoints the date of a Shakespeare play with rare precision.
It remains unclear if these figures represent real individuals, or if the authorial "I" who addresses them represents Shakespeare himself, though Wordsworth believed that with the sonnets "Shakespeare unlocked his heart".
In particular, he expanded the dramatic potential of characterisation, plot, language, and genre.
He is often called England's national poet, and the "Bard of Avon".
The consistory court of the Diocese of Worcester issued a marriage licence on 27&nbsp;November 1582.
The Romantic poets attempted to revive Shakespearean verse drama, though with little success.
The ceremony may have been arranged in some haste, since the Worcester chancellor allowed the marriage banns to be read once instead of the usual three times, and six months after the marriage Anne gave birth to a daughter, Susanna, baptised 26 May 1583.
His actual date of birth remains unknown, but is traditionally observed on 23&nbsp;April, Saint George's Day.
Hamnet died of unknown causes at the age of 11 and was buried 11&nbsp;August 1596.
Shakespeare bequeathed the bulk of his large estate to his elder daughter Susanna under stipulations that she pass it down intact to "the first son of her body".
Shakespeare died on 23 April 1616, at the age of 52.
Scholars are not certain when each of the 154 sonnets was composed, but evidence suggests that Shakespeare wrote sonnets throughout his career for a private readership.
Shakespeare combined the two throughout his career, with ''Romeo and Juliet'' perhaps the best example of the mixing of the styles.
In 1608, the partnership also took over the Blackfriars indoor theatre.
Some scholars claim that members of Shakespeare's family were Catholics, at a time when practicing Catholicism in England was against the law.
At 18, he married 26-year-old Anne Hathaway, who was pregnant.
The Halls had one child, Elizabeth, who married twice but died without children in 1670, ending Shakespeare's direct line.
Expressions such as "with bated breath" (''Merchant of Venice'') and "a foregone conclusion" (''Othello'') have found their way into everyday English speech.
Published in 1609, the ''Sonnets'' were the last of Shakespeare's non-dramatic works to be printed.
In practice, this meant that his verse was usually unrhymed and consisted of ten syllables to a line, spoken with a stress on every second syllable.
After 1610, Shakespeare wrote fewer plays, and none are attributed to him after 1613.
Soliloquies had been used mainly to convey information about characters or events; but Shakespeare used them to explore characters' minds.
/ Blessed be the man that spares these stones, / And cursed be he that moves my bones.'')
Extant records of Shakespeare's property purchases and investments indicate that his association with the company made him a wealthy man, and in 1597 he bought the second-largest house in Stratford, New Place, and in 1605, invested in a share of the parish tithes in Stratford.
Shakespeare's first plays were written in the conventional style of the day.
William Shakespeare was the son of John Shakespeare, an alderman and a successful glover originally from Snitterfield, and Mary Arden, the daughter of an affluent landowning farmer.
'''William Shakespeare''' (; 26 April 1564 (baptised)&nbsp;– 23 April 1616) was an English :poet, :playwright, and actor, widely regarded as the greatest writer in the English language and the world's pre-eminent dramatist.
Few analysts believe that the published collection follows Shakespeare's intended sequence.
According to the critic Frank Kermode, "the play-offers neither its good characters nor its audience any relief from its cruelty".
Eliot, along with G. Wilson Knight and the school of New Criticism, led a movement towards a closer reading of Shakespeare's imagery.
By the time of ''Romeo and Juliet'', ''Richard II'', and ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' in the mid-1590s, Shakespeare had begun to write a more natural poetry.
Once Shakespeare mastered traditional blank verse, he began to interrupt and vary its flow.
At the age of 18, he married Anne Hathaway, with whom he had three children: Susanna, and twins Hamnet and Judith.
Although the performance records are patchy, the King's Men performed seven of Shakespeare's plays at court between 1 November 1604 and 31 October 1605, including two performances of ''The Merchant of Venice''.
Greene's attack is the earliest surviving mention of Shakespeare's work in the theatre.
The authors of the ''Parnassus'' plays at St John's College, Cambridge numbered him with Chaucer, Gower and Spenser.
In the last phase of his career, Shakespeare adopted many techniques to achieve these effects.
"We may therefore borrow a convenient phrase from the theatre of today and class them together as Shakespeare's problem plays."
This strength of design ensures that a Shakespeare play can survive translation, cutting and wide interpretation without loss to its core drama.
Throughout his career, Shakespeare divided his time between London and Stratford.
His characters become more complex and tender as he switches deftly between comic and serious scenes, prose and poetry, and achieves the narrative variety of his mature work.
After the death of Queen Elizabeth in 1603, the company was awarded a royal patent by the new King James I, and changed its name to the King's Men.
In Shakespeare's day, English grammar, spelling and pronunciation were less standardised than they are now, and his use of language helped shape modern English.
He died within a month of signing his will, a document which he begins by describing himself as being in "perfect health".
Critic George Steiner described all English verse dramas from Coleridge to Tennyson as "feeble variations on Shakespearean themes."
Proposed alternative candidates include Francis Bacon, Christopher Marlowe, and Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford.
After 1608, they performed at the indoor Blackfriars Theatre during the winter and the Globe during the summer.
In the First Folio, Ben Jonson called Shakespeare the "Soul of the age, the applause, delight, the wonder of our stage", though he had remarked elsewhere that "Shakespeare wanted art".
Unlike the introverted Hamlet, whose fatal flaw is hesitation, the heroes of the tragedies that followed, Othello and King Lear, are undone by hasty errors of judgement.
The 26 so-called "Dark Lady" sonnets, addressed to a married woman, are taken as evidence of heterosexual liaisons.
In the 18th and 19th centuries, his reputation also spread abroad.
In 1610, John Davies of Hereford wrote that "good Will" played "kingly" roles.
Shakespeare's works include the 36 plays printed in the First Folio of 1623, listed according to their folio classification as comedies, histories and tragedies.
The term, much debated and sometimes applied to other plays, remains in use, though ''Hamlet'' is definitively classed as a tragedy.
The Victorians produced his plays as lavish spectacles on a grand scale.
As Shakespeare's mastery grew, he gave his characters clearer and more varied motivations and distinctive patterns of speech.
In March 1613 he bought a gatehouse in the former Blackfriars priory; and from November 1614 he was in London for several weeks with his son-in-law, John Hall.
''And cvrst be he  moves my bones.''
For several decades, Rymer's view held sway; but during the 18th century, critics began to respond to Shakespeare on his own terms and acclaim what they termed his natural genius.
There he rented rooms from a French Huguenot named Christopher Mountjoy, a maker of ladies' wigs and other headgear.
In ''Cymbeline'', for example, Jupiter descends "in thunder and lightning, sitting upon an eagle: he throws a thunderbolt.
In 1709, Rowe passed down a tradition that Shakespeare played the ghost of Hamlet's father.
Shakespeare's will scarcely mentions his wife, Anne, who was probably entitled to one third of his estate automatically.
No extant contemporary source explains how or why he died.
Until ''Romeo and Juliet'', for example, romance had not been viewed as a worthy topic for tragedy.
Striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, hors'd
In 1612, he was called as a witness in ''Bellott v. Mountjoy'', a court case concerning the marriage settlement of Mountjoy's daughter, Mary.
The ghosts fall on their knees."
He appears to have retired to Stratford around 1613, at age 49, where he died three years later.
From the 18th century, the desire for authentic Shakespeare portraits fuelled claims that various surviving pictures depicted Shakespeare.
In the 1950s, a wave of new critical approaches replaced modernism and paved the way for "post-modern" studies of Shakespeare.
The indoor setting, combined with the Jacobean fashion for lavishly staged masques, allowed Shakespeare to introduce more elaborate stage devices.
''To digg the dvst encloased heare.''
The listener is challenged to complete the sense.
His plays have been translated into every major living language and are performed more often than those of any other playwright.
Another 18th-century story has Shakespeare starting his theatrical career minding the horses of theatre patrons in London.
Some commentators have seen this change in mood as evidence of a more serene view of life on Shakespeare's part, but it may merely reflect the theatrical fashion of the day.
Biographers suggest that his career may have begun any time from the mid-1580s to just before Greene's remarks.
Samuel Johnson quoted him more often than any other author in his ''A Dictionary of the English Language'', the first serious work of its type.
Shakespeare's plays are difficult to date, however, and studies of the texts suggest that ''Titus Andronicus'', ''The Comedy of Errors'', ''The Taming of the Shrew'' and ''The Two Gentlemen of Verona'' may also belong to Shakespeare's earliest period.
Scholars have identified 20,000 pieces of music linked to Shakespeare's works.
The popular comic actor Will Kempe played the servant Peter in ''Romeo and Juliet'' and Dogberry in ''Much Ado About Nothing'', among other characters.
The playwright and critic George Bernard Shaw mocked the cult of Shakespeare worship as "bardolatry", claiming that the new naturalism of Ibsen's plays had made Shakespeare obsolete.
After 1594, Shakespeare's plays were performed only by the Lord Chamberlain's Men, a company owned by a group of players, including Shakespeare, that soon became the leading playing company in London.
Textual evidence also supports the view that several of the plays were revised by other writers after their original composition.
Londoners flocked there to see the first part of ''Henry IV'', Leonard Digges recording, "Let but Falstaff come, Hal, Poins, the rest&nbsp;... and you scarce shall have a room".
Shakespeare has also inspired many painters, including the Romantics and the Pre-Raphaelites.
As several scholars have noted, whatever his private views, Shakespeare "conformed to the official state religion", as Park Honan put it.
No evidence suggests that Shakespeare approved these editions, which the First Folio describes as "stol'n and surreptitious copies".
Shakespeare combined poetic genius with a practical sense of the theatre.
Burbage played the leading role in the first performances of many of Shakespeare's plays, including ''Richard III'', ''Hamlet'', ''Othello'', and ''King Lear''.
This period begins and ends with two tragedies: ''Romeo and Juliet'', the famous romantic tragedy of sexually charged adolescence, love, and death; and ''Julius Caesar''—based on Sir Thomas North's 1579 translation of Plutarch's ''Parallel Lives''—which introduced a new kind of drama.
In ''Venus and Adonis'', an innocent Adonis rejects the sexual advances of Venus; while in ''The Rape of Lucrece'', the virtuous wife Lucrece is raped by the lustful Tarquin.
He reshaped each plot to create several centres of interest and to show as many sides of a narrative to the audience as possible.
When the company found themselves in dispute with their landlord, they pulled The Theatre down and used the timbers to construct the Globe Theatre, the first playhouse built by actors for actors, on the south bank of the Thames at Southwark.
A third narrative poem, ''A Lover's Complaint'', in which a young woman laments her seduction by a persuasive suitor, was printed in the first edition of the ''Sonnets'' in 1609.
The differences may stem from copying or printing errors, from notes by actors or audience members, or from Shakespeare's own papers.
''Good frend for Iesvs sake forbeare,''
The early plays were influenced by the works of other Elizabethan dramatists, especially Thomas Kyd and Christopher Marlowe, by the traditions of medieval drama, and by the plays of Seneca.
He preserved aspects of his earlier style in the later plays, however.
The Globe opened in autumn 1599, with ''Julius Caesar'' one of the first plays staged.
Little evidence substantiates such stories other than hearsay collected after his death, and Shakeshafte was a common name in the Lancashire area.
''The Comedy of Errors'' was also based on classical models, but no source for ''The Taming of the Shrew'' has been found, though it is related to a separate play of the same name and may have derived from a folk story.
Of the tributes from fellow authors, one refers to his relatively sudden death: "We wondered, Shakespeare, that thou went'st so soon/From the world's stage to the grave's tiring room."
Shakespeare produced most of his known work between 1589 and 1613.
He increasingly tuned his metaphors and images to the needs of the drama itself.
Some 20th-century scholars have suggested that Shakespeare may have been employed as a schoolmaster by Alexander Hoghton of Lancashire, a Catholic landowner who named a certain "William Shakeshafte" in his will.
In ''King Lear'', the old king commits the tragic error of giving up his powers, initiating the events which lead to the torture and blinding of the Earl of Gloucester and the murder of Lear's youngest daughter Cordelia.
Less bleak than the tragedies, these four plays are graver in tone than the comedies of the 1590s, but they end with reconciliation and the forgiveness of potentially tragic errors.
Shakespeare signed his last will and testament on 25 March 1616; the following day his new son-in-law, Thomas Quiney was found guilty of fathering an illegitimate son by Margaret Wheeler, who had died during childbirth.
Most playwrights of the period typically collaborated with others at some point, and critics agree that Shakespeare did the same, mostly early and late in his career.
Many of the plays had already appeared in quarto versions—flimsy books made from sheets of paper folded twice to make four leaves.
Nevertheless, poet and critic John Dryden rated Shakespeare highly, saying of Jonson, "I admire him, but I love Shakespeare".
Retirement from all work was uncommon at that time.
By the 1980s, Shakespeare studies were open to movements such as structuralism, feminism, New Historicism, African-American studies, and queer studies.
His last three plays were collaborations, probably with John Fletcher, who succeeded him as the house playwright of the King's Men.
, is an illustration of two similes in ''Macbeth'':
He was born in Stratford-upon-Avon and baptised there on 26&nbsp;April 1564.
The wit and wordplay of ''Much Ado About Nothing'', the charming rural setting of ''As You Like It'', and the lively merrymaking of ''Twelfth Night'' complete Shakespeare's sequence of great comedies.
Around 230 years after Shakespeare's death, doubts began to be expressed about the authorship of the works attributed to him.
In the late 19th century, Edward Dowden classified four of the late comedies as romances, and though many scholars prefer to call them ''tragicomedies'', Dowden's term is often used.
The blank verse of his early plays is quite different from that of his later ones.
His early plays were primarily comedies and histories, and these are regarded as some of the best work ever produced in these genres.
These include two operas by Giuseppe Verdi, ''Otello'' and ''Falstaff'', whose critical standing compares with that of the source plays.
The poetry depends on extended, sometimes elaborate metaphors and conceits, and the language is often rhetorical—written for actors to declaim rather than speak.
However, it is perhaps relevant that the bubonic plague raged in London throughout 1609.
Sometime before 1623, a funerary monument was erected in his memory on the north wall, with a half-effigy of him in the act of writing.
Half a century later, John Ward, the vicar of Stratford, wrote in his notebook: "Shakespeare, Drayton and Ben Jonson had a merry meeting and, it seems, drank too hard, for Shakespeare died of a fever there contracted", not an impossible scenario, since Shakespeare knew Jonson and Drayton.
The Expressionists in Germany and the Futurists in Moscow mounted productions of his plays.
Shakespeare's standard poetic form was blank verse, composed in iambic pentameter.
In 1593 and 1594, when the theatres were closed because of plague, Shakespeare published two narrative poems on erotic themes, ''Venus and Adonis'' and ''The Rape of Lucrece''.
Its plaque compares him to Nestor, Socrates, and Virgil.
In some cases, for example ''Hamlet'', ''Troilus and Cressida'' and ''Othello'', Shakespeare could have revised the texts between the quarto and folio editions.
The epitaph carved into the stone slab covering his grave includes a curse against moving his bones, which was carefully avoided during restoration of the church in 2008:
Soon, however, Shakespeare began to adapt the traditional styles to his own purposes.
Some attributions, such as ''Titus Andronicus'' and the early history plays, remain controversial, while ''The Two Noble Kinsmen'' and the lost ''Cardenio'' have well-attested contemporary documentation.
No Shakespearean poems were included in the First Folio.
Thomas Rymer, for example, condemned Shakespeare for mixing the comic with the tragic.
In 1623, however, John Heminges and Henry Condell, two friends and fellow actors of Shakespeare, published a more definitive text known as the First Folio, a posthumous collected edition of his dramatic works that included all but two of the plays now recognised as Shakespeare's.
After the lyrical ''Richard II'', written almost entirely in verse, Shakespeare introduced prose comedy into the histories of the late 1590s, ''Henry IV, parts 1'' and ''2'', and ''Henry V''.
The Swiss Romantic artist Henry Fuseli, a friend of William Blake, even translated ''Macbeth'' into German.
Only a small minority of academics believe there is reason to question the traditional attribution, but interest in the subject, particularly the Oxfordian theory of Shakespeare authorship, continues into the 21st century.
In 1606, the name of William's daughter Susanna appears on a list of those who failed to attend Easter communion in Stratford.
In the 19th century, critical admiration for Shakespeare's genius often bordered on adulation.
No written contemporary description of Shakespeare's physical appearance survives, and no evidence suggests that he ever commissioned a portrait, so the Droeshout engraving, which Ben Jonson approved of as a good likeness, and his Stratford monument provide perhaps the best evidence of his appearance.
John Aubrey reported that Shakespeare had been a country schoolmaster.
Grammar schools varied in quality during the Elizabethan era, but grammar school curricula were largely similar: the basic Latin text was standardised by royal decree, and the school would have provided an intensive education in grammar based upon Latin classical authors.
Marxist playwright and director Bertolt Brecht devised an epic theatre under the influence of Shakespeare.
In his last phase, he wrote tragicomedies, also known as romances, and collaborated with other playwrights.
He was the third child of eight and the eldest surviving son.
The titular hero of one of Shakespeare's most famous tragedies, ''Hamlet'', has probably been discussed more than any other Shakespearean character, especially for his famous soliloquy which begins "To be or not to be; that is the question".
Susanna, the first of their three children, was born six months later on 26 May 1583.
Rowe was the first biographer to record the tradition, repeated by Johnson, that Shakespeare retired to Stratford "some years before his death".
''The Phoenix and the Turtle'', printed in Robert Chester's 1601 ''Love's Martyr'', mourns the deaths of the legendary phoenix and his lover, the faithful turtle dove.
After the Lord Chamberlain's Men were renamed the King's Men in 1603, they entered a special relationship with the new King James.
Shakespeare was born and brought up in Stratford-upon-Avon, Warwickshire.
(Modern spelling: ''Good friend, for Jesus' sake forbear, / To dig the dust enclosed here.
It was prefaced with a poem by Ben Jonson, in which Shakespeare is hailed, presciently, as "not of an age, but for all time".
Few details of Shakespeare's sexuality are known.
By 1604, he had moved north of the river again, to an area north of St Paul's Cathedral with many fine houses.
The grand speeches in ''Titus Andronicus'', in the view of some critics, often hold up the action, for example; and the verse in ''The Two Gentlemen of Verona'' has been described as stilted.
During the Romantic era, Shakespeare was praised by the poet and literary philosopher Samuel Taylor Coleridge; and the critic August Wilhelm Schlegel translated his plays in the spirit of German Romanticism.
Many critics believe that Shakespeare's greatest tragedies represent the peak of his art.
In 1591 the authorities reported that John Shakespeare had missed church "for fear of process for debt", a common Catholic excuse.
In this play, Shakespeare adds a supernatural element to the tragic structure.
Shakespeare has been commemorated in many statues and memorials around the world, including funeral monuments in Southwark Cathedral and Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey.
Others read the same passages as the expression of intense friendship rather than romantic love.
Shakespeare's work has made a lasting impression on later theatre and literature.
He seems to have planned two contrasting series: one about uncontrollable lust for a married woman of dark complexion (the "dark lady"), and one about conflicted love for a fair young man (the "fair youth").
The strongest evidence might be a Catholic statement of faith signed by his father, John Shakespeare, found in 1757 in the rafters of his former house in Henley Street.
In ''Macbeth'', the shortest and most compressed of Shakespeare's tragedies, uncontrollable ambition incites Macbeth and his wife, Lady Macbeth, to murder the rightful king and usurp the throne, until their own guilt destroys them in turn.
He dedicated them to Henry Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton.
The actors in Shakespeare's company included the famous Richard Burbage, William Kempe, Henry Condell and John Heminges.
Where several versions of a play survive, each differs from the other.
Other authors argue that there is a lack of evidence about Shakespeare's religious beliefs.
The next day, two of Hathaway's neighbours posted bonds guaranteeing that no lawful claims impeded the marriage.
''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' is a witty mixture of romance, fairy magic, and comic lowlife scenes.
It is often beautiful, but its sentences tend to start, pause, and finish at the end of lines, with the risk of monotony.
After the birth of the twins, Shakespeare left few historical traces until he is mentioned as part of the London theatre scene in 1592.
Critics consider that its fine qualities are marred by leaden effects.
Many of his plays were published in editions of varying quality and accuracy during his lifetime.
Shakespeare was not revered in his lifetime, but he received a large amount of praise.
