Morris was a caring father to his daughters, and years later they both recounted having idyllic childhoods.
Disconcerted, Morris would not publish again for a further eight years.
It also led to him seeing far less of Burne-Jones, with whom he had strong political differences; although once a republican, Burne-Jones had become increasingly conservative, and felt that the DF were exploiting Morris for his talents and influence.
Morris also retained an active interest in various groups, joining the Hogarth Club, the Mediaeval Society, and the Corps of Artist Volunteers, the latter being in contrast to his later pacifism.
In August 1883, Janey would be introduced to the poet Wilfrid Scawen Blunt, with whom she embarked on a second affair, which Morris might have been aware of.
Leaving Jane and his children with Rossetti at Kelmscott, in July 1871 Morris left for Iceland with Faulkner, W.H.
Morris was aware that, in retaining the division between employer and employed, the company failed to live up to his own egalitarian ideals, but defended this, asserting that it was impossible to run a socialist company within a competitive capitalist economy.
them as ''"among the most lyrical and enchanting fantasies in the English language."''
The building's design was a co-operative effort, with Morris focusing on the interiors and the exterior being designed by Webb, for whom the House represented his first commission as an independent architect.
This attitude was compounded by his reading of Thomas Carlyle's book ''Past and Present'' (1843), in which Carlyle championed Medieval values as a corrective to the problems of Victorian society.
It contained both prose and aspects of poetic verse.
While Morris devoted much time to trying to convert his friends to the cause, of Morris' circle of artistic comrades, only Webb and Faulkner fully embraced socialism, while Swinburne expressed his sympathy with it.
In December 1884, Morris founded the Socialist League (SL) with other SDF defectors.
Kelmscott Manor is owned by the Society of Antiquaries of London and is open to the public.
He settled on Kelmscott Manor in the village of Kelmscott, Oxfordshire, obtaining a joint tenancy on the building with Rossetti in June.
It is unknown if their affair was ever sexual, although by this point other members of the group were noticing Rossetti and Janey's closeness.
Designed as a homage to Chaucer, it consisted of 24 stories, adopted from an array of different cultures, and each by a different narrator; set in the late 14th century, the synopsis revolved around a group of Norsemen who flee the Black Death by sailing away from Europe, on the way discovering an island where the inhabitants continue to venerate the ancient Greek gods.
Morris had also continued with his translation work; in April 1887, Reeves and Turner published the first volume of Morris' translation of Homer's ''Odyssey'', with the second following in November.
At this time, Morris also re-focused his attentions on SPAB campaigning; those causes he championed including the preservation of St. Mary's Church in Oxford, Blythburgh Church in Suffolk, Peterborough Cathedral, and Rouen Cathedral.
Dyeing of wools, silks, and cottons was the necessary preliminary to what he had much at heart, the production of woven and printed fabrics of the highest excellence; and the period of incessant work at the dye-vat (1875–76) was followed by a period during which he was absorbed in the production of textiles (1877–78), and more especially in the revival of carpet-weaving as a fine art.
Morris oversaw production of the League's monthly—soon to become weekly—newspaper, ''Commonweal'', serving as its editor for six years, during which time he kept it financially afloat.
The collection includes books, embroideries, tapestries, fabrics, wallpapers, drawings & sketches, furniture and stained glass, and forms the focus of two published works (produced to accompany special exhibitions).
Morris became increasingly fascinated with the idyllic Medievalist depictions of rural life which appeared in the paintings of the Pre-Raphaelites, and spent large sums of money purchasing such artworks.
In particular, De Camp argued the plots of the novels are heavily driven by coincidence; while many things just happened in the romances, the novels are still weakened by the dependence on it.
This presented the creation of SPAB as Morris' greatest achievement.
Burne-Jones shared this interest, but took it further by becoming an apprentice to one of the foremost Pre-Raphaelite painters, Dante Gabriel Rossetti; the three soon became close friends.
Morris was heavily influenced by the writings of the art critic John Ruskin, being particularly inspired by his chapter "On the Nature of Gothic Architecture" in the second volume of ''The Stones of Venice''; he later described it as "one of the very few necessary and inevitable utterances of the century".
For additional staff, they employed boys from the Industrial Home for Destitute Boys in Euston, central London, many of whom were trained as apprentices.
One of the meeting rooms in the Oxford Union, decorated with the wallpaper in his style, is named the Morris Room.
Now in complete control of the Firm, Morris took an increased interest in the process of textile dyeing and entered into a co-operative agreement with Thomas Wardle, a silk dyer who operated the Hencroft Works in Leek, Staffordshire.
The Press' ''magnum opus'' would be the Kelmscott Chaucer, published in an edition of 425 copies, which had taken years to complete and included 87 illustrations from Burne-Jones.
Morris also continued writing poetry and began designing illuminated manuscripts and embroidered hangings.
Morris began publishing poetry and short stories in 1856 through the ''Oxford and Cambridge Magazine'' which he founded with his friends and financed while at university.
The press also published editions of works by Keats, Shelley, Ruskin, and Swinburne, as well as copies of various Medieval texts.
The Pre-Raphaelite style was heavily Medievalist and Romanticist, emphasising abundant detail, intense colours and complex compositions; it greatly impressed Morris and the Set.
By the 1870s, the firm was offering both embroidery patterns and finished works.
Britain's first socialist party, the Democratic Federation (DF), had been founded by Henry Hyndman, an adherent of the socio-political ideology of Marxism, with Morris joining the DF in January 1883.
In this period, British socialism was a small, fledgling and vaguely defined movement, with only a few hundred adherents.
However, they faced much opposition from established design companies, particularly those belonging to the Neo-Classical school.
Morris eventually became disillusioned with the EQA, describing it as being "full of wretched little personalities".
By the early 1890s, Morris was increasingly ill and living largely as an invalid; aside from his gout, he also exhibited signs of epilepsy.
When Janey took May and Jenny to Oneglia in Italy, the latter suffered a serious seizure, with Morris rushing to the country to see her.
Morris is recognised as one of the most significant cultural figures of Victorian Britain; though best known in his lifetime as a poet, he posthumously became better known for his designs.
With a production cost of £485 it was also one of the more expensive productions of the Kelmscott Press, on which Morris would make a financial loss.
Born in Walthamstow, Essex, to a wealthy middle-class family, Morris came under the strong influence of medievalism while studying Classics at Oxford University, there joining the Birmingham Set.
Together they produced prose translations of the Eddas and Sagas for publication in English.
Morris taught himself embroidery, working with wool on a frame custom-built from an old example.
Morris was passionate in denouncing the "bullying and hectoring" that he felt socialists faced from the police, and on one occasion was arrested after fighting back against a police officer; a magistrate dismissed the charges.
How can we combat all this luxury and waste?
Morris' biographer E.P.
The Kelmscott Press would go on to publish 23 of Morris' books, more than those of any other author.
Morris had initiated a system of profit sharing among the Firm's upper clerks, however this did not include the majority of workers, who were instead employed on a piecework basis.
Morris was particularly angered that Gladstone's government did not reverse the Disraeli regime's occupation of the Transvaal, introduced the Coercion Bill, and oversaw the Bombardment of Alexandria.
The V&A's British Galleries house other decorative works by Morris and his associates.
They also spent much time playing tricks on each other, enjoying games like hide and seek, and singing while accompanied by the piano.
In the Spring of 1877, the Firm opened a store at No.
To combat this, the League joined a Defence Club with other socialist groups, including the SDF, for which Morris was appointed treasurer.
His literary contributions helped to establish the modern fantasy genre, while he played a significant role in propagating the early socialist movement in Britain.
The school was Anglican in faith and in March 1849 Morris was confirmed by the Bishop of Salisbury in the college chapel, developing an enthusiastic attraction towards the Anglo-Catholic movement and its Romanticist aesthetic.
Morris' friends nicknamed him "Topsy" after a character in ''Uncle Tom's Cabin''.
Combining utopian socialism and soft science fiction, the book tells the tale of a contemporary socialist, William Guest, who falls asleep and awakes in the mid-20th century, discovering a future society based on common ownership and democratic control of the means of production.
Morris has exerted a powerful influence on thinking about art and design over the past century.
In December 1888, the Chiswick Press published Morris' ''The House of the Wolfings'', a fantasy story set in Iron Age Europe which provides a reconstructed portrait of the lives of Germanic-speaking Gothic tribes.
Morris also regularly contributed articles to the newspaper, in doing so befriending another contributor, George Bernard Shaw.
A sequel, ''The Roots of the Mountains'', followed in 1890.
In August 1891, he took his daughter Jenny on a tour of Northern France to visit the Medieval churches and cathedrals.
It did not sell well and garnered few reviews, most of which were unsympathetic.
Morris was born at Elm House in Walthamstow, Essex, on 24 March 1834.
In the House's grounds he set up a workshop, focusing on the production of hand-knotted carpets.
He burned with guilt at the fact that his "good fortune only" allowed him to live in beautiful surroundings and to pursue the work he adored.
Standen in West Sussex, England, was designed by Webb between 1892 and 1894 and decorated with Morris carpets, fabrics and wallpapers.
Given the conflict between his personal and professional life and his socio-political views, MacCarthy described Morris as "a conservative radical".
12 of these 18 were handwritten copies of Nordic tales such as ''Halfdan the Black'', ''Frithiof the Bold'', and ''The Dwellers of Eyr''.
Morris adopted Ruskin's philosophy of rejecting the tawdry industrial manufacture of decorative arts and architecture in favour of a return to hand-craftsmanship, raising artisans to the status of artists, creating art that should be affordable and hand-made, with no hierarchy of artistic mediums.
He also visited Dublin, there offering his support for Irish nationalism, and formed a branch of the League at his Hammersmith house.
Although retaining a main home in London, from 1871 Morris rented the rural retreat of Kelmscott Manor, Oxfordshire.
Published in four parts by F. S. Ellis, it soon gained a cult following and established Morris' reputation as a major poet.
Morris' first biographer Mackail described him as being both "a typical Englishman" and "a typical Londoner of the middle class" albeit one who was transformed into "something quite individual" through the "force of his genius".
7, Hammersmith Terrace is the former home of Sir Emery Walker, a close friend and colleague of Morris.
For Morris, this decision resulted in a strained relationship with his family, who believed that he should have entered either commerce or the clergy.
The Morris family were followers of the evangelical Protestant form of Christianity, and William was baptised four months after his birth at St. Mary's Church, Walthamstow.
His first volume, ''The Defence of Guenevere and Other Poems'' (1858), was the first book of Pre-Raphaelite poetry to be published.
On the other hand, L. Sprague de Camp considered Morris's fantasies to be not wholly successful, partly because Morris eschewed many literary techniques from later eras.
Morris desired a new home for himself and his wife, resulting in the construction of the Red House in the Kentish hamlet of Upton near Bexleyheath, ten miles from central London.
What drove him into revolutionary activism was his anger and shame at the injustices within society.
Morris later related that while he had once believed that "one might further real Socialistic progress by doing what one could on the lines of ordinary middle-class Radicalism", following Gladstone's election he came to realise "that Radicalism is on the wrong line, so to say, and will never develope sic into anything more than Radicalism: in fact that it is made for and by the middle classes and will always be under the control of rich capitalists.
His socialist activism monopolised his time, forcing him to abandon a translation of the Persian ''Shahnameh''.
In 1893 the Hammersmith Socialist Society co-founded the Joint Committee of Socialist Bodies with representatives of the SDF and Fabian Society; Morris helped draw up its "Manifesto of English Socialists".
Turning SPAB's attention abroad, in Autumn 1879 Morris launched a campaign to protect St Mark's Basilica in Venice from restoration, garnering a petition with 2000 signatures, among whom were Disraeli, Gladstone, and Ruskin.
He came to reject state socialism and large centralized control, instead emphasising localised administration within a socialist society.
In 1875, Morris assumed total control of the company, which was renamed Morris & Co.
Rossetti was known to taunt Morris with the intention of trying to enrage him for the amusement of himself and their other friends.
Tired of architecture, Morris abandoned his apprenticeship, with Rossetti persuading him to take up painting instead, which he chose to do in the Pre-Raphaelite style.
Bax taught Morris more about Marxism, and introduced him to Marx's collaborator, Friedrich Engels; Engels thought Morris honest but lacking in practical skills to aid the proletariat revolution.
Working conditions at the Abbey were better than at most Victorian factories.
Morris aided Rossetti and Burne-Jones in painting the Arthurian murals at Oxford Union, although his contributions were widely deemed inferior and unskilled compared to those of the others.
He took an interest in fishing with his brothers as well as gardening in the Hall's grounds, and spent much time exploring the Forest, where he was fascinated both by the Iron Age earthworks at Loughton Camp and Ambresbury Banks and by the Early Modern Hunting Lodge at Chingford.
He spent much of his time at Staffordshire dye works mastering the processes of that art and making experiments in the revival of old or discovery of new methods.
Deeming the colours to be of inferior quality, Morris rejected the chemical aniline dyes which were then predominant, instead emphasising the revival of organic dyes, such as indigo for blue, walnut shells and roots for brown, and cochineal, kermes, and madder for red.
These novels&nbsp;– including ''The Wood Beyond the World'' and ''The Well at the World's End''&nbsp;– have been credited as important milestones in the history of fantasy fiction, because, while other writers wrote of foreign lands, or of dream worlds, or the future (as Morris did in ''News from Nowhere''), Morris's works were the first to be set in an entirely invented fantasy world.
Soon after, in July, Morris returned to Iceland, revisiting many of the sites he had previously seen, but then proceeding north to Varna glacier and Fljótsdalur.
Founded in 1955, the William Morris Society is devoted to his legacy, while multiple biographies and studies of his work have seen publication.
In 1891 he founded the Kelmscott Press to publish limited-edition, illuminated-style print books, a cause to which he devoted his final years.
Early fantasy writers like Lord Dunsany, E. R. Eddison and James Branch Cabell were familiar with Morris's romances.
His talk indeed is wonderfully to the point and remarkable for clear good sense."
Becoming highly fashionable and much in demand, the firm profoundly influenced interior decoration throughout the Victorian period, with Morris designing tapestries, wallpaper, fabrics, furniture, and stained glass windows.
His designs would be produced from 1864 by Jeffrey and Co. of Islington, who created them for the Firm under Morris's supervision.
The house is decorated in the Arts & Crafts style, including with extensive collections of Morris wallpaper, furniture, and textiles.
Excited that both of his homes were along the course of the River Thames, in August 1880 he and his family took a boat trip along the river from Kelmscott House to Kelmscott Manor.
This printing press was specially reinforced to produce Morris's ''Chaucer'' in 1896.
Shortly after, a collection of Morris' essays, ''Signs of Change'', was published.
Instead he preferred the writings of William Cobbett and Sergius Stepniak, although he also read the critique of socialism produced by John Stuart Mill.
He had a wild temper, and when sufficiently enraged could suffer seizures and blackouts.
Although from very different backgrounds, they found that they had a shared attitude to life, both being keenly interested in Anglo-Catholicism and Arthurianism.
In contrast to Morris's former publication, ''The Life and Death of Jason'' was well received, resulting in the publishers paying Morris a fee for the second edition.
Morris long dreamed of weaving tapestries in the medieval manner, which he called "the noblest of the weaving arts."
Morris also developed a keen interest in creating hand-written illuminated manuscripts, producing 18 such books between 1870 and 1875, the first of which was ''A Book of Verse'', completed as a birthday present for Georgina Burne-Jones.
He also went on various holidays; in the summer of 1866 he, Webb, and Taylor toured the churches of northern France.
6551) at auction for $233,000.
Morris was fascinated by London but dismayed at its pollution and rapid expansion into neighbouring countryside, describing it as "the spreading sore".
J. R. R. Tolkien was inspired by Morris's reconstructions of early Germanic life in ''The House of the Wolfings'' and ''The Roots of the Mountains''.
These children were followed by the birth of siblings Stanley in 1837, Rendall in 1839, Arthur in 1840, Isabella in 1842, Edgar in 1844, and Alice in 1846.
Continuing with his literary output, Morris translated his own version of Virgil's ''Aeneid'', titling it ''The Aeneids of Vergil'' (1876).
A number of the Press' books contained illustrations provided by Burne-Jones.
He sold Red House, and in autumn 1865 moved with his family to No.
The young Tolkien attempted a retelling of the story of Kullervo from the ''Kalevala'' in the style of ''The House of the Wolfings''; Tolkien considered much of his literary work to have been inspired by an early reading of Morris, even suggesting that he was unable to better Morris's work; the names of characters such as "Gandolf" and the horse Silverfax appear in ''The Well at the World's End''.
Morris was keenly interested in Icelandic literature, having befriended the Icelandic theologian Eiríkr Magnússon.
As a result, Morris would spend time with Wardle at his home on various occasions between summer 1875 and spring 1878.
Morris designed and commissioned furniture for the flat in a Medieval style, much of which he painted with Arthurian scenes in a direct rejection of mainstream artistic tastes.
Morris was greatly influenced by Romanticism, with Thompson asserting that Romanticism was "bred into his bones, and formed his early consciousness."
It told the story of socialists who are put on trial in front of a corrupt judge; the tale ends with the prisoners beind freed by a proletariat revolution.
Politically, Morris was a staunch revolutionary socialist and anti-imperialist, and although raised a Christian he came to identify as a non-religious atheist.
The author Henry James described Morris as "short, burly, corpulent, very careless and unfinished in his dress&nbsp;...
Under the leadership of Charles Mowbray, the League's anarchist wing were growing and called on the League to embrace violent action in trying to overthrow the capitalist system.
Mackail asserted that Morris became "a manufacturer not because he wished to make money, but because he wished to make the things he manufactured."
In 1892 Morris embarked on a publication of the Anglo-Saxon tale ''Beowulf'' by contacting the Anglo-Saxon specialist Alfred John Wyatt at Christ's College, Cambridge and asking him to provide a translation of the text in prose, on which Morris based his poetical version.
In July 1874, the Morris family then took Burne-Jones' two children with them on their holiday to Bruges, Belgium.
They hoped to reinstate decoration as one of the fine arts and adopted an ethos of affordability and anti-elitism.
Imagining the creation of an artistic community at Upton, Morris helped develop plans for a second house to be constructed adjacent to Red House in which Burne-Jones could live with his family; the plans were abandoned when Burne-Jones' son Philip died from scarlet fever.
Adopting the role of honorary secretary and treasurer, most of the other early members of SPAB were his friends, while the group's program was rooted in Ruskin's ''The Seven Lamps of Architecture'' (1849).
Morris's prose style in these novels has been praised by Edward James, who described
They then proceeded to visit a number of other cities, including Venice, Padua, and Verona, with Morris attaining a greater appreciation of the country than he had on his previous trip.
Morris took an active role in the EQA campaign, authoring the lyrics for the song "Wake, London Lads!"
Following in Street's footsteps, Morris became active in the growing movement to return originality and mastery of technique to embroidery, and was one of the first designers associated with the Royal School of Art Needlework with its aim to "restore Ornamental Needlework for secular purposes to the high place it once held among decorative arts."
26 Queen Square in Bloomsbury, the same building that the Firm moved its base of operations to earlier in the summer.
In January 1856, the Set began publication of ''The Oxford and Cambridge Magazine'', designed to contain "mainly Tales, Poetry, friendly critiques and social articles".
Back in England, he spent an increasing amount of time at Kelmscott Manor.
His funeral was held on 6 October, during which his corpse was carried from Hammersmith to Paddington rail station, where it was transported to Oxford, and from there to Kelmscott, where it was buried in the churchyard of St. George's Church.
However, the group was facing an internal schism between those (such as Hyndman), who argued for a parliamentary path toward socialism, and those (like Morris) who deemed the Houses of Parliament intrinsically corrupt and capitalist.
James Joyce also drew inspiration from his work.
During these years the Firm carried out a number of high-profile designs; from September 1866 to January 1867, they redecorated the Armoury and Tapestry Room in St. James' Palace, in the latter year also designing the Green Dining Room at the South Kensington Museum (it is now the Morris Room at the Victoria and Albert Museum).
Ruskin had achieved attention in Victorian society for championing the art of a group of painters who had emerged in London in 1848 calling themselves the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood.
By the time of their first conference in July 1885, the League had eight branches across England and had affiliations with several socialist groups in Scotland.
Wightwick Manor in the West Midlands, England, is a notable example of the Morris & Co. style, with original Morris wallpapers and fabrics, De Morgan tiles, and Pre-Raphaelite works of art, managed by the National Trust.
Although a Marxist, he befriended prominent anarchist activists Stepniak and Peter Kropotkin, and came to be influenced by their anarchist views, to the extent that biographer Fiona MacCarthy described his approach as being "Marxism with visionary libertarianism".
At the League's Fourth Conference in May 1888, factional divisions became increasingly apparent between Morris' anti-parliamentary socialists, the parliamentary socialists, and the anarchists; the Bloomsbury Branch were expelled for supporting parliamentary action.
Morris deemed calligraphy to be an art form, and taught himself both Roman and italic script, as well as learning how to produce gilded letters.
She last saw him in 1881, and he died in April the following year.
In the field of textile design, Morris revived a number of dead techniques, and insisted on the use of good quality raw materials, almost all natural dyes, and hand processing.
At Rossetti's recommendation, Morris and Burne-Jones moved in together to the flat at Bloomsbury's No.
While there, he enjoyed walks in the countryside and focused on writing poetry.
There they met the President of the Althing, Jón Sigurðsson, with Morris being sympathetic to the Icelandic independence movement.
14 in May, that same month in which the company was founded.
As a result of his growing sympathy for the working-classes and poor, Morris felt personally conflicted in serving the interests of these individuals, privately describing it as "ministering to the swinish luxury of the rich".
He was of a nervous disposition, and throughout his life relied on networks of male friends to aid him in dealing with this.
That month, the Firm was officially disbanded and replaced by Morris & Co, although Burne-Jones and Webb would continue to produce designs for it in future.
He offered support for far left activists on trial, including a number of militant anarchists whose violent tactics he nevertheless denounced.
In summer 1881, Morris took out a lease on the seven-acre former silk weaving factory at Merton Abbey Mills, in Merton, Southwest London.
The following month he marched in a central London demonstration commemorating the first anniversary of Marx's death and the thirteenth anniversary of the Paris Commune.
Burne-Jones described it as "the beautifullest place on Earth."
17 Red Lion Square by November 1856.
Morris still remained firmly in an employer relation with those working at the Press, although organised outings for them and paid them above average wages.
In later life he suffered from gout, a common complaint among middle-class males in the Victorian period.
However, as the British socialist movement grew it faced increased opposition from the establishment, with police frequently arresting and intimidating activists.
imitation of medieval prose.
As the leading figure in the League Morris embarked on a series of speeches and talks on street corners, in working men's clubs, and in lecture theatres across England and Scotland.
In July 1896, he went on a cruise to Norway with construction engineer John Carruthers, during which he visited Vadsö and Trondheim; during the trip his physical condition deteriorated and he began experiencing hallucinations.
Before publishing its first work, Morris ensured that he had mastered the techniques of printing and secured supplies of hand-made paper and vellum which would be necessary for production.
The first of these would be one of Morris' own novels, ''The Story of the Glittering Plain'', which was published in May 1891 and soon sold out.
In December 1894 he was devastated upon learning of his mother's death; she had been 90 years old.
He did use the opportunity to visit many of the prehistoric sites of Wiltshire, such as Avebury and Silbury Hill, which fascinated him.
At Christmas 1851, Morris was removed from the school and returned to Water House, where he was privately tutored by the Reverend Frederick B.
MacCarthy described Morris' lifestyle as being "late Victorian, mildly bohemian, but bourgeois", with Mackail commenting that he exhibited many of the traits of the bourgeois Victorian class: "industrious, honest, fair-minded up their lights, but unexpansive and unsympathetic".
For Morris, the Middle Ages represented an era with strong chivalric values and an organic, pre-capitalist sense of community, both of which he deemed preferable to his own period.
They were known among themselves as the "Brotherhood" and to historians as the Birmingham Set.
However, despite its success, the Firm was not turning over a large net profit, and this, coupled with the decreasing value of Morris' stocks, meant that he had to decrease his spending.
Situated within an orchard, the house and garden were intricately linked in their design.
His apprenticeship focused on architectural drawing, and there he was placed under the supervision of the young architect Philip Webb, who became a close friend.
449 Oxford Street and obtained new staff who were able to improve its professionalism; as a result, sales increased and its popularity grew.
Raised into a wealthy middle-class family, he was named after his father, a financier who worked as a partner in the Sanderson & Co. firm, bill brokers in the City of London.
Sir Henry Newbolt's medieval allegorical novel, Aladore, was influenced by Morris's fantasies.
Influenced both by Ruskin and by John Keats, Morris began to spend more time writing poetry, in a style that was imitative of much of theirs.
The DF began publishing a weekly newspaper, ''Justice'', which soon faced financial losses that Morris covered.
In January 1861, Morris and Janey's first daughter was born: named Jane Alice Morris, she was commonly known as "Jenny".
Giving lectures on tapestries for the group, in 1892 he would be elected president.
At Queen Square, the Morris family lived in a flat directly above the Firm's shop.
Morris published translations of ''The Saga of Gunnlaug Worm-Tongue'' and ''Grettis Saga'' in 1869, and the ''Story of the Volsungs and Niblungs'' in 1870.
In 1877 he founded the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings to campaign against the damage caused by architectural restoration.
Returning to Kelmscott House, he became a complete invalid, being visited by friends and family, before dying of tuberculosis on the morning of 4 October 1896.
Operating from premises at No.
