His only vehicle was the pages of ''Life'', a weekly humor magazine.
On election day he declared victory and resigned.
He could do a bum act with a rope that an ordinary man couldn't get away with, and make the audience think it was great, so I used to study him by the hour, and from him I learned the great secret of the show business—knowing when to get off.
Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt was his favorite.
He made a trip to Asia in 1931 and to Central and South America the following year.
The personality clash increased after his mother's death, and young Will went from one venture to another with little success.
He was directed three times by John Ford.
Rogers quipped that his ancestors did not come over on the ''Mayflower'', but they "met the boat".
The variety revue began at midnight in the top-floor night club of Ziegfeld's New Amsterdam Theatre, and drew many influential—and regular—customers.
I did some roping and riding, and Jack, who was one of the smartest showmen I ever knew, took a great interest in me.
Rogers later recalled these early years:
Rogers was born on the Dog Iron Ranch in Indian Territory, near present-day Oologah, Oklahoma.
Near Vinita, Oklahoma, a statue of Rogers stands outside the west anchor of the McDonald's that spans both lanes of the interstate.
I just watch the government and report the facts."
Before they left Fairbanks they signed and mailed a burgee, a distinguishing flag belonging to the South Coast Corinthian Yacht Club.
:Lord, the money we do spend on Government and it's not one bit better than the government we got for one-third the money twenty years ago.
To correct this, he brought in a wind-up alarm clock, and its on-air buzzing alerted him to begin wrapping up his comments.
The National Press Club dubbed him "Ambassador at Large of the United States".
During the depths of the Great Depression, angered by Washington's inability to feed the people, he embarked on a cross country fundraising tour for the Red Cross.
The Will Rogers Shrine of the Sun is an 80-foot observation tower on Cheyenne Mountain west of Colorado Springs, at the base of Pikes Peak near the Cheyenne Mountain Zoo.
He returned to the United States in 1904, appeared at the St. Louis World's Fair, and then began to try his roping skills on the vaudeville circuits.
While Rogers enjoyed film acting, his appearances in silent movies suffered from the obvious restrictions of silence—not the strongest medium for him, having gained his fame as a commentator on stage.
Many early films were made near the major New York performing market, so Rogers could make the film, yet still rehearse and perform in the ''Follies''.
In his films, Rogers began by playing a simple cowboy; his characters evolved to explore the meaning of innocence in ordinary life.
Only three of his siblings, sisters Sallie Clementine, Maude Ethel, and May (Mary), survived into adulthood.
The theatre was placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1984.
Rogers served as a goodwill ambassador to Mexico, and a brief stint as mayor of Beverly Hills.
Another widely quoted Will Rogers comment was "I don't make jokes.
Rogers appeared in 21 feature films alongside such noted performers as Lew Ayres, Billie Burke, Richard Cromwell, Jane Darwell, Andy Devine, Janet Gaynor, Rochelle Hudson, Boris Karloff, Myrna Loy, Joel McCrea, Hattie McDaniel, Ray Milland, Maureen O'Sullivan, ZaSu Pitts, Dick Powell, Bill "Bojangles" Robinson, Mickey Rooney, and Peggy Wood.
His articles reflected a fear that Europeans would again go to war, and thus he recommended that the United States should assume an isolationist posture.
The family tomb is at the Will Rogers Memorial Museum in nearby Claremore, which stands on the site purchased by Rogers in 1911 for his retirement home.
:When I die, my epitaph, or whatever you call those signs on gravestones, is going to read: "I joked about every prominent man of my time, but I never met a man I dident  like."
Near the end of 1901, he and a friend left home with aspirations to work as gauchos in Argentina.
U.S. Route 66 is known as the Will Rogers Highway; a plaque dedicating the highway to the humorist is located opposite the western terminus of Route 66 in Santa Monica.
In 1944, Rogers's body was moved from a holding vault in California to the tomb; his wife Betty was interred beside him later that year upon her death.
Rogers was the youngest of eight children.
Ambassador Dwight Morrow.
Others, such as Broadway comedian Raymond Hitchcock and Britain's Sir Harry Lauder, preceded him by several years.
He appeared in three films with his friend Stepin Fetchit (aka Lincoln T. Perry): ''David Harum'' (1934), ''Judge Priest'' (1934) and ''The County Chairman'' (1935).
I believe that we could without any degree of egotism, single-handed lick any nation in the world.
He symbolized the self-made man, the common man, who believed in America, in progress, in the American Dream of upward mobility.
Since he easily rambled from one subject to another, reacting to his studio audience, he often lost track of the half-hour time limit in his earliest broadcasts, and was cut off in mid-sentence.
Oklahoma has named many places and buildings for Rogers.
This memorial was dedicated on February 16, 1950, by Rogers's longtime friend, Amon G. Carter.
Rogers became an advocate for the aviation industry after noticing advancements in Europe and befriending Charles Lindbergh, the most famous aviator of the era.
Loved for his cool mind and warm heart, he was often considered the successor to such greats as Artemus Ward and Mark Twain.
Of the statues in this part of the Capitol, the Rogers sculpture is the only one facing the Chamber entrance.
Will Rogers Elementary School in Santa Monica is named for Rogers, as is Will Rogers Elementary School in Ventura.
By 1935, his show was being announced as "Will Rogers and his famous Alarm Clock".
He had already published a book of wisecracks and had begun a steady stream of humor books.
He was a good student and an avid reader of ''The New York Times'', but he dropped out of school after the 10th grade.
It was sculpted in clay by Jo Davidson, a close friend whom Rogers nicknamed the "headhunter" because Davidson was always looking for heads to sculpt, then cast in bronze in Brussels, Belgium.
His newspaper column, which ran from 1922 to 1935, expressed his traditional morality and his belief that political problems were not as serious as they sounded.
In 1908, Rogers married Betty Blake (1879–1944), and the couple had four children: Will Rogers, Jr., Mary Amelia, James Blake, and Fred Stone.
Rogers worked the Dog Iron Ranch for a few years.
The feat got front page attention from the newspapers, giving him valuable publicity and an audience eager to see more.
While he was using one, he would send the other to the site of his next performance.
Americans of all walks admired his individualism, his appreciation for democratic ideas, and his liberal philosophies on most issues.
Among the films he made for Roach in 1924 were three directed by Rob Wagner: ''Two Wagons Both Covered'', ''Going to Congress'' and ''Our Congressman''.
Rogers crusaded for aviation expansion, and provided Americans with first-hand accounts of his world travels.
Rogers thought all campaigning was bunk.
An editorial in ''The New York Times'' said that "Will Rogers in the Follies is carrying on the tradition of Aristophanes, and not unworthily."
'Himself, a horse, and a man', answered Shea."
The Academy of Western Artists, based in Gene Autry, Oklahoma, presents the Will Rogers Medallion award for excellence in western literature at an annual gathering in the Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex.
By the mid-1930s, the American people adored Rogers.
From about 1925 to 1928, Rogers traveled the length and breadth of the United States in a "lecture tour".
In these years, Rogers increasingly expressed the views of the "common man" in America.
I am so proud of that, I can hardly wait to die so it can be carved.
Also, a beach in Pacific Palisades was named Will Rogers State Beach.
Willie Hammerstein saw his vaudeville act, and signed Rogers to appear on the Victoria Roof—which was literally on a rooftop—with his pony.
A casting of the Davidson sculpture that stands in National Statuary Hall, paid for by Davidson, resides at the museum.
Known as "Oklahoma's Favorite Son", Rogers was born to a prominent Cherokee Nation family in Indian Territory (now part of Oklahoma).
Due to his untimely death, the curtain before which he performed last remained with the California Theatre where the artifact stays to this day, and two memorial murals by Ken Twitchell grace the exterior of the fly loft.
Rogers gave numerous after-dinner speeches, became a popular convention speaker, and gave dozens of benefits for victims of floods, droughts, or earthquakes.
Through the continuing series of columns for the McNaught Syndicate between 1922 and 1935, as well as in his personal appearances and radio broadcasts, he won the loving admiration of the American people, poking jibes in witty ways at the issues of the day and prominent people—often politicians.
He wrote frequently for the mass-circulation upscale magazine ''The Saturday Evening Post'', where Rogers advised Americans to embrace the frontier values of neighborliness and democracy on the domestic front while remaining clear of foreign entanglements.
Rogers visited Post often at the airport in Burbank, California while he was modifying the aircraft, and asked Post to fly him through Alaska in search of new material for his newspaper column.
He played a homespun farmer (''State Fair)'' in 1933, an old-fashioned doctor (''Dr.
In 1926, the high-circulation weekly magazine ''The Saturday Evening Post'' financed a European tour for Rogers in return for the publication of his articles.
He was the leading political wit of his time, and was the highest paid Hollywood movie star.
During this time he became the first civilian to fly from coast to coast with pilots flying the mail in early air mail flights.
His humor never offended even those who were the targets of it.
The clean moral tone of his films led to various public schools taking their classes, during the school day, to attend special showings of some of them.
(He began his lectures by pointing out that "A humorist entertains, and a lecturer annoys.")
A Cherokee judge, he was a Confederate veteran and served as a delegate to the Oklahoma Constitutional Convention.
He always performed in front of special jewelled curtains of which he had two.
Rogers's home, stables, and polo fields are preserved today for public enjoyment as Will Rogers State Historic Park in Pacific Palisades.
He downplayed academic credentials, noting, "Everybody is ignorant, only on different subjects."
The California Theatre also named one of its reception spaces the Will Rogers Room.
Bob Hope is the best known political humorist to follow Rogers's example.
The signed burgee is on display at South Coast Corinthian Yacht Club in Marina del Rey, California.
He toured the lecture circuit.
Rogers County, Oklahoma, is named in honor of Clement Rogers.
Bull'') in 1933, a small town banker (''David Harum '') in 1934, and a rustic politician (''Judge Priest'') in 1934.
After making a test flight in July, Post and Rogers left Lake Washington in Renton in the Lockheed Orion-Explorer in early August and then made several stops in Alaska.
In 1935 the famed aviator Wiley Post, an Oklahoman, became interested in surveying a mail-and-passenger air route from the West Coast to Russia.
They arrived in Argentina in May 1902, and spent five months trying to make it as ranch owners in the Pampas.
The house he was born in had been built in 1875 and was known as the "White House on the Verdigris River".
His parents, Clement Vann Rogers (1839–1911) and Mary America Schrimsher (1838–1890), were both of part Cherokee ancestry, making Rogers himself 9/32 (just over 1/4) Cherokee.
While Post piloted the aircraft, Rogers wrote his columns on his typewriter.
There are two middle schools named for Will Rogers (one in Long Beach and the other in Fair Oaks).
He made two other feature silents and a travelogue series in 1927, and did not return to the screen until his time in the 'talkies' began in 1929.
A United States Navy submarine  is also named in his honor.
His run at the New Amsterdam ran on into 1916, and Rogers's growing popularity led to an engagement on the more famous ''Ziegfeld Follies''.
The California city was incorporated, and thus run by an appointed city manager.
Rogers made whirlwind visits to numerous European capitals and met with both international figures and common people.
She died when Will was 11, and his father remarried less than two years after her death.
:I got a job on Hammerstein's Roof at $140 a week for myself, my horse, and the man who looked after it.
Scribner replied, "'Give him eight weeks at $250'".
In 1934, he made a globe-girdling tour and returned to play the lead in Eugene O'Neill's stage play ''Ah, Wilderness!''
Parker and the Vicious Circle''.
Texas Jack gave him a reference letter for the Wirth Brothers Circus there, and Rogers continued to perform as a rider and trick roper, and worked on his pony act.
Rogers appeared as an anchor of stability; his conventional home life and traditional moral code reminded people of an innocent past.
Every week, from Memorial Day through Election Day, Rogers caricatured the farcical humors of grave campaign politics.
He made 48 silent movies, but with the arrival of sound in 1929, he became a top star in that medium.
Rogers's vaudeville rope act led to success in the Ziegfeld Follies, which in turn led to the first of his many movie contracts.
His widow, Betty, willed the property to the state of California upon her death in 1944, under the condition that polo be played on the field every year; it is now home to the Will Rogers Polo Club.
It was he who gave me the idea for my original stage act with my pony.
This weekly Sunday evening show, ''The Gulf Headliners'', ranked among the top radio programs in the country.
He had tentatively agreed to go on loan from Fox to MGM to star in the 1935 movie version of the play; however, his concern over a fan's reaction to the "facts-of-life" talk between his character and the latter's son caused him to decline the role—and that freed up his schedule allowing him to fly with Wiley Post that summer.
It's the fellow who knows when to quit that the audience wants more of.
Shea told Scribner Rogers was getting $150 and would take $175.
His most unusual role may have been in the first talking version of Mark Twain's novel ''A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court''.
Clement Rogers achieved financial success as a rancher and used his influence to help soften the negative effects of white acculturation on the tribe.
Rogers even provided an epigram on his most famous epigram:
I ain't got anything funny to say.
With his voice becoming increasingly familiar to audiences, he was able to basically play himself, without normal makeup, in each film, managing to ad-lib and even work in his familiar commentaries on politics at times.
On takeoff, the engine failed at low altitude, and the aircraft plunged into the lagoon, shearing off the right wing, and ended up inverted in the shallow water of the lagoon.
Rogers began a weekly column, titled "Slipping the Lariat Over", at the end of 1922.
At this stage, Rogers's act was strictly physical, a display of daring riding and clever tricks with his lariat.
"'What's he carrying?
The University of Oklahoma named the large Will Rogers Room in the student union for him, as did the Boy Scouts of America with the Will Rogers Council and the Will Rogers Scout Reservation near Cleveland.
From 1929 to 1935, he made radio broadcasts for the Gulf Oil Company.
In the fall of 1915, Rogers began to appear in Florenz Ziegfeld's ''Midnight Frolic''.
Rogers was not the first entertainer to use political humor before his audience.
His popularity soared to new heights with films including ''Young As You Feel'', ''Judge Priest'', and ''Life Begins at 40'' with Richard Cromwell and Rochelle Hudson.
At one performance, with President Woodrow Wilson in the audience, he improvised a "roast" of presidential policies that had Wilson, and the entire audience, in stitches and proved his remarkable skill at off-the-cuff, witty commentary on current events.
He bought a ranch in Pacific Palisades and set up his own production company.
There are thirteen public schools in Oklahoma named for Will Rogers, including Will Rogers High School in Tulsa.
He wrote from a non-partisan point of view and became a friend of presidents and a confidant of the great.
The Architect of the Capitol, David Lynn, said there had never been such a large ceremony or crowd in the Capitol.
He eventually appeared in most of the ''Follies'', from 1916 to 1925.
In 1947, a college football bowl game was named in his honor, but the event folded after the first year.
America in the 1920s was happy and prosperous in various ways (leading to the nickname ''Roaring Twenties''), but it was also in some ways disenchanted by, and alienated from, the outside world.
In his last movies, Rogers explores a society fracturing into competing classes from economic pressures.
His mother was quarter-Cherokee and a hereditary member of the Paint Clan.
It was obvious to many common people that World War I was an outrageous and largely senseless carnage, and isolationism was popular.
By this time, Rogers had refined his act.
For the next decade, Rogers estimated he worked for fifty weeks a year at the Roof and at the city's myriad vaudeville theaters.
He was much more interested in cowboys and horses, and learned to rope and use a lariat.
After Rogers gained recognition as a humorist-philosopher in vaudeville, he gained a national audience in acting and literary careers from 1915 to 1935.
Whitmore changed the monologue each time he performed it, using actual quotations from Rogers as commentary on events current at the time of the performance.
His father, Clement, was a leader within Cherokee society.
We never lost a war and we never won a conference in our lives.
He Texas Jack had a little Wild West aggregation that visited the camps and did a tremendous business.
Oklahoma leaders asked Rogers to represent the state as one of their two statues in the Capitol, and Rogers agreed on the condition that his image would be placed facing the House Chamber, supposedly so he could "keep an eye on Congress".
It had 1,000 seats in its single auditorium.
He then made jokes about what he had read in that day's newspapers.
:America has a unique record.
Rogers roped the steer to the delight of the crowd.
Both the birthplace and the museum are open to the public.
Both men died instantly.
Rogers was famous for his use of language.
It is often claimed he took a job breaking in horses for the British Army, but the Boer War had ended three months earlier.
On August 15, they left Fairbanks, Alaska for Point Barrow.
Although he supported Roosevelt's New Deal, he could just as easily joke about it:
The "mayor's office" was merely a ceremonial one that enabled Will to make more jokes about do-nothing politicians such as himself.
According to guides at the Capitol, each President rubs the left shoe of the Rogers statue for good luck before entering the House Chamber to give the State of the Union address.
I learned a lot about the show business from him.
A casting of ''Into the Sunset'' stands in the entrance to the main campus quad at Texas Tech University in Lubbock, Texas.
He was also in ''County Chairman'' (1935), ''Steamboat 'Round the Bend'' (1935), and ''In Old Kentucky'' (1935).
The line "All I know is what I read in the papers" is often incorrectly described as Rogers's most famous punch line, when it was, in fact, his opening line.
The family lived in New York, but they spent summers in Oklahoma.
During his 1926 European trip, he witnessed the European advances in commercial air service and compared them to the almost nonexistent facilities in the United States.
Another casting resides at the Will Rogers Memorial in Claremore, Oklahoma.
In a 1971 piece for Smithsonian, it was argued that when the floats Post had ordered did not arrive at Seattle in time, he used a set that was designed for a larger type, making the already nose-heavy hybrid aircraft still more nose-heavy.
Rogers died in 1935 with aviator Wiley Post, when their small airplane crashed in northern Alaska.
But we can't confer with Costa Rica and come home with our shirts on.
He made his first silent movie, ''Laughing Bill Hyde'', filmed in Fort Lee, New Jersey, in 1918.
On a trip to New York City, Rogers was at Madison Square Garden when a wild steer broke out of the arena and began to climb into the viewing stands.
It helped somewhat that he wrote a good many of the title cards appearing in his films.
A recent expansion and renovation of the Will Rogers World Airport includes a statue of Will Rogers on horseback in front of the terminal.
Only after Will won acclaim in vaudeville did the rift begin to heal, but Clement's death in 1911 precluded a full reconciliation.
Will Rogers World Airport in Oklahoma City was named for him, as was the Will Rogers Turnpike, also known as the section of Interstate 44 between Tulsa and Joplin, Missouri.
Clement had high expectations for his son and desired him to be more responsible and business-minded.
Hollywood discovered Rogers in 1918, as Samuel Goldwyn gave him the title role in ''Laughing Bill Hyde''.
He was named for the Cherokee leader Col. William Penn Adair.
Grateful for the guidance but anxious to move on, Rogers quit the circus and went to Australia.
Rogers was a staunch Democrat, but he also supported Republican Calvin Coolidge.
He effectively utilized up-to-date slang and invented new words to fit his needs.
All I know is what I read in the papers."
Radio was the exciting new medium, and Rogers became a star there as well, recycling his newspaper pieces.
Rogers actually got work at James Piccione's ranch near Mooi River Station in the Pietermaritzburg district of Natal.
To prove the point he mounted a mock campaign in 1928 for the presidency.
He reasoned that for the moment American needs could best be served by concentrating on domestic questions and avoiding foreign entanglements.
Rogers demonstrated multiple skills, and was an indefatigable worker.
In 1923, he began a one-year stint for Hal Roach and made 12 pictures.
The house was moved about ¾ mile (1.2&nbsp;km) to its present location overlooking its original site when the Verdigris River valley was flooded to create Oologah Lake.
His monologues on the news of the day followed a similar routine every night.
When he came back to the United States and worked in Wild West shows, he noticed that audiences were just as fascinated by his frontier, Oklahoma twang.
