In January 1812 Hazlitt embarked on a sometime career as a lecturer, in this first instance by delivering a series of talks on the British philosophers at the Russell Institution in London.
Although Hazlitt rejected the Unitarian theology, his time at Hackney left him with much more than religious scepticism.
In one of his last respites from pain, reflecting on his personal history, he wrote, "This is the time for reading.
Finally they returned via Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium, and France again, arriving at Dover, England, on 16 October 1825.
It was Hazlitt's intention to disprove the notion that man is naturally selfish (benevolent actions being rationally modified selfishness, ideally made habitual), a premise fundamental to much of the moral philosophy of Hazlitt's day.
Hazlitt also had to spend time in London in these years.
Cambridge: at the University Press, 1917.
He had already devoted years to pondering much of the thinking espoused by several of these figures.
He is now considered one of the greatest critics and essayists in the history of the English language, placed in the company of Samuel Johnson and George Orwell.
There were two extended stops on this excursion: Paris, where the Hazlitts remained for three months; and Vevey, Switzerland, where they rented space in a farmhouse for three months.
And he found culture more widespread among the working classes: "You see an apple-girl in Paris, sitting at a stall with her feet over a stove in the coldest weather, or defended from the sun by an umbrella, reading Racine and Voltaire".
Though somewhat uneven in quality, his lectures were ultimately judged a success.
Edited by Ronald Blythe.
For months, during the preparations for the divorce and as he tried to earn a living, he alternated between rage and despair, on the one hand, and the comforting if unrealistic thought that she was really "a good girl" and would accept him at last.
Most often, he quoted his beloved Shakespeare and to a lesser extent Milton.
Hazlitt does not present a measured account of the plays' strengths and weaknesses, as did Dr. Johnson, or view them in terms of a "mystical" theory, as Hazlitt thought his contemporary A.W.
Yet Hazlitt goes out of his way to admire where he can.
Coleridge, whom Hazlitt had once idolised, gets special attention, but, again, with an attempt to moderate earlier criticisms.
Hazlitt's reputation has continued to rise, and now many contemporary thinkers, poets, and scholars consider him one of the greatest critics in the English language, and its finest essayist.
He found relief by a change of course, shifting the focus of his analysis from the acting of Shakespeare's plays to the substance of the works themselves.
Sarah Walker was, as some of Hazlitt's friends could see, a fairly ordinary girl.
Less than a fifth of his projected masterpiece consists of Hazlitt's own words.
Few details remain of Hazlitt's daily life in his last years.
One of Soho's fashionable hotels is named after the writer.
His works having fallen out of print, Hazlitt underwent a small decline, though in the late 1990s his reputation was reasserted by admirers and his works reprinted.
), A. J. Wyatt (1925), Charles Harold Gray (1926), G. E. Hollingworth (1926), Stanley Williams (1937?
One commission again proved fortunate, as it brought him back in touch with Coleridge and Wordsworth, both of whose portraits he painted, as well as one of Coleridge's son Hartley.
At times he scrutinises the subtle workings of the individual mind (as in "On Dreams" 1823); or he invites us to laugh at harmless eccentricities of human nature ("On People with One Idea" 1821).
Long after they had parted ways, Hazlitt would speak of Coleridge as "the only person I ever knew who answered to the idea of a man of genius".
On returning to London with his son in August 1827, Hazlitt was shocked to discover that his wife, still in Paris, was leaving him.
But often, as in his self-imposed seclusion at Winterslow, he was able to achieve a "philosophic detachment", and he continued to turn out essays of remarkable variety and literary merit, most of them making up the two volumes of ''Table-Talk''.
He links his own vitriol, however, to a strain of malignity at the core of human nature:
According to John Wilson of ''Blackwood's Magazine'', for example, Hazlitt had already "been excommunicated from all decent society, and nobody would touch a dead book of his, any more than they would the body of a man who had died of the plague".
This, along with the turmoil in the wake of the French Revolution, sparked in Hazlitt and his classmates lively debates on these issues, as they saw their world being transformed around them.
He began to contribute miscellaneous essays to ''The Examiner'' in 1813, and the scope of his work for the ''Chronicle'' was expanded to include drama criticism, literary criticism, and political essays.
Venice presented fewer difficulties, and was a scene of special fascination for him: "You see Venice rising from the sea", he wrote, "its long line of spires, towers, churches, wharfs ... stretched along the water's edge, and you view it with a mixture of awe and incredulity".
London: Nonesuch Press, 1930.
After a shaky beginning, Hazlitt attracted some attention—and some much-needed money—by these lectures, and they provided him with an opportunity to expound some of his own ideas.
*''Winterslow: Essays and Characters.''
Now he goes out of his way to qualify his earlier assessments.
His low tolerance for any who, he thought, had abandoned the cause of liberty, along with his frequent outspokenness, even tactlessness, in social situations made it difficult for many to feel close to him, and at times he tried the patience of even Charles Lamb.
Income from his lectures had also proved insufficient to keep him afloat.
Hazlitt would remember little of his years in America, save the taste of barberries.
With vague words, she evaded absolute commitment until she could decide which she liked better or was the more advantageous catch.
Hazlitt's hotel located on Frith Street is the last of the homes William lived in and today still retains much of the interior he would have known so well.
And it was over, though Hazlitt could not for some time persuade himself to believe so.
While praising the poem's sublimity and intellectual power, he took to task the intrusive egotism of its author.
(Many were written expressly for inclusion in the book of the same name, ''Table-Talk; or, Original Essays'', which appeared in different editions and forms over the next few years.)
So it occurred to William that he might earn a living similarly, and he began to take lessons from John.
In playgoing he found one of his greatest consolations.
Now Sir Walter Scott was writing his own life of Napoleon, from a strictly conservative point of view, and Hazlitt wanted to produce one from a countervailing, liberal perspective.
In September 1794, he had  met William Godwin, the reformist thinker whose recently published ''Political Justice'' had taken English intellectual circles by storm.
In the meantime, Hazlitt's marriage continued its downward spiral; he was writing furiously for several periodicals to make ends meet; waiting so far in vain for the collection ''The Round Table'' to be issued as a book (which it finally was in February 1817); suffering bouts of illness; and making enemies by his venomous political diatribes.
Over a period of three months, he spent long hours rapturously studying the gallery's collections, and hard thinking and close analysis would later inform a considerable body of his art criticism.
In 1786–87 the family returned to England and settled in Wem, in Shropshire.
Hazlitt was oblivious to the surroundings and tolerated the grumpiness.
Edited by William Carew Hazlitt.
There, he seems to have exchanged visits with some of his old friends, but few details of these occasions were recorded.
A  Hazlitt Society was then inaugurated.
Hazlitt, on his part, later wrote that of all the younger generation of poets, Keats showed the most promise, and he became Keats's first anthologist when he included several of Keats's poems in a collection of British poetry he compiled in 1824, three years after Keats's death.
Bentham, Godwin, and Malthus, Wordsworth, Coleridge, and Byron were some of the most prominent writers; Wilberforce and Canning were prominent in the political arena; and a few who were hard to classify, such as The Rev.
At his emotional nadir, he contemplated suicide.
Also in 1807 Hazlitt undertook a compilation of parliamentary speeches, published that year as ''The Eloquence of the British Senate''.
A side trip to Geneva during this period led him to a review of his ''Spirit of the Age'', by Francis Jeffrey, in which the latter takes him to task for striving too hard after originality.
But he also found himself struggling against bouts of illness, nearly dying at Winterslow in December 1827.
If the stage alluding to his remarks in "The Free-Admission" shows us the masks of men and the pageant of the world, books let us into their souls and lay open to us the secrets of our own.
The event seemed to him to mark the end of hope for the common man against the oppression of "legitimate" monarchy.
Many in positions of power had used Malthus's theory to deny the poor relief in the name of the public good, to prevent their propagating the species beyond the means to support it; while on the rich no restraints whatsoever were imposed.
In a preface to a later edition of ''Table-Talk'', Hazlitt explained that in these essays he eschewed scholarly precision in favour of a combination of the "literary and the conversational".
By September 1830, Hazlitt was confined to his bed, with his son in attendance, his pain so acute that his doctor kept him drugged on opium much of the time.
Afterwards he would then tarry with those friends who could tolerate his irascibility, the number of whom dwindled as a result of his occasionally outrageous behaviour.
First, they toured parts of Scotland, then, later in 1824, began a European tour lasting over a year.
At this time he was reading the novels of Edward Bulwer in hopes of reviewing them for ''The Edinburgh Review''.
In others, he invites his readers to join him in gazing at the spectacle of human folly and perversity ("On Will-making" 1821, or "On Great and Little Things" 1821, for example).
Unlike the English, he discovered, the French attended the theatre reverently, respectfully, "the attention ... like that of a learned society to a lecture on some scientific subject".
*''The Selected Writings of William Hazlitt.''
As they advanced slowly in those days of pre-railway travel (at one stage taking nearly a week to cover less than two hundred miles), Hazlitt registered a running commentary on the scenic points of interest.
But how am I entitled to make my fortune (which cannot be done without all this anxiety and drudgery) who do hardly any thing at all, and never any thing but what I like to do?
And, despite interludes of illness, as well as the miseries of coach travel and the dishonesty of some hotel keepers and coach drivers, Hazlitt managed to enjoy himself.
The grey skies and bad food compared unfavorably with his recent retreat, and he was suffering from digestive problems (these recurred throughout much of his later life), though it was also good to be home.
Though completed in 1810, this work did not see the light of day until 1816, and so provided no financial gain to satisfy the needs of a young husband and father.
I rise when I please, breakfast ''at length'', write what comes into my head, and after taking a mutton-chop and a dish of strong tea, go to the play, and thus my time passes.
In August 1820, a month after his father's death at 83, he rented a couple of rooms in 9 Southampton Buildings in London from a tailor named Micaiah Walker.
*''The Fight, and Other Writings.''
Slowly Hazlitt began to find enough work to eke out a bare living.
In literary circles however, his reputation had been tarnished in the meantime: he had openly taken both Wordsworth and Coleridge to task on personal grounds and for failing to fulfill the promise of their earlier accomplishments, and both were apparently responsible for retaliatory rumours which seriously damaged Hazlitt's repute.
In 2012, Random House of Canada founded an online magazine, edited by journalist Chris Frey, called ''Hazlitt'', named after the writer, whom they characterise as "the original blogger".
There had been criticisms of Shakespeare before, but either they were not comprehensive or they were not aimed at the general reading public.
Primarily, these 434 maxims took to an extreme his method of arguing by paradoxes and acute contrasts.
But a book is the secret and sure charm to bring all these implied associations to a focus.
Intent upon the scene and upon the thoughts that stir within me, I conjure up the cheerful passages of my life, and a crowd of happy images appear before me".
He was an unabashed sightseer who wanted to take in everything available, and he could recreate vividly all he saw".
His outrage at events then taking place in English politics in reaction to Napoleon's wars led to his writing and publishing, at his own expense (though he had almost no money), a political pamphlet, ''Free Thoughts on Public Affairs'' (1806), an attempt to mediate between private economic interests and a national application of the thesis of his ''Essay'' that human motivation is not, inherently, entirely selfish.
:Towards the close of the first day's journey ... we had a splendid view of the country we were to travel, which lay stretched out beneath our feet to an immense distance, as we descended into the little town of Pozzo Borgo.
Not quite like any other essay by Hazlitt, it proved to be one of his most popular, was frequently reprinted after his death, and nearly two centuries later was judged to be "one of the most passionately written pieces of prose in the late Romantic period".
Others he knew personally, and for years their philosophy or poetry had been the subject of his thoughts and lectures.
Such partisan onslaughts brought spirited responses.
:Days, weeks, months, and even years might have passed on much in the same manner.... We breakfasted at the same hour, and the tea-kettle was always boiling...; a ''lounge'' in the orchard for an hour or two, and twice a week we could see the steam-boat creeping like a spider over the surface of the lake; a volume of the Scotch novels..., or M. Galignani's Paris and London ''Observer'', amused us till dinner time; then tea and a walk till the moon unveiled itself, "apparent queen of the night," or the brook, swoln with a transient shower, was heard more distinctly in the darkness, mingling with the soft, rustling breeze; and the next morning the song of peasants broke upon refreshing sleep, as the sun glanced among the clustering vine-leaves, or the shadowy hills, as the mists retired from their summits, looked in at our windows.
Hazlitt was never to feel entirely in sympathy with Godwin's philosophy, but it gave him much food for thought.
Critics have been divided as to the literary merits of ''Liber Amoris'', a deeply personal account of frustrated love that is quite unlike anything else Hazlitt ever wrote.
But the majority of the reviewers were enthusiastic.
*''Metropolitan Writings.''
*''Sketches and Essays.''
Edited by Tom Paulin and David Chandler.
For Jeffrey, the book was not so much a learned study of Shakespeare's plays as much as a loving and eloquent appreciation, full of insight, which displayed "considerable originality and genius".
Thoroughly immersed in the Malthusian controversy, for example, Hazlitt had published ''A Reply to the Essay on Population'' as early as 1807, and the essay on Malthus is a distillation of Hazlitt's earlier criticisms.
But other opportunities awaited him.
The society publishes an annual peer reviewed journal called ''The Hazlitt Review''.
Of equal or even greater importance to him were the paintings.
Hazlitt's son also came to visit, and conflicts broke out between him and his father that also drove a wedge between Hazlitt and his second wife: their marriage was by now in free fall.
His thoughts drifted to gloom and misanthropy.
He is also acknowledged as the finest art critic of his age.
More than just a distraction from his woes, his devotion to this pastime led to musings on the value of competitive sports and on human skill in general, expressed in writings like his notice of the "Death of John Cavanagh" (a celebrated Fives player) in ''The Examiner'' on 9 February 1817, and the essay "The Indian Jugglers" in ''Table-Talk'' (1821).
For his part, Coleridge showed an interest in the younger man's germinating philosophical ideas, and offered encouragement.
While, out of respect for his father, Hazlitt never openly broke with his religion, he suffered a loss of faith, and left Hackney before completing his preparation for the ministry.
"I could not have been more delighted if I had heard the music of the spheres", he wrote years later in his essay "My First Acquaintance with Poets".
In April Hazlitt jumped at Coleridge's invitation to visit him at his residence in Nether Stowey, and that same day was taken to call in on William Wordsworth at his house in Alfoxton.
One ''Blackwood's'' article mocked him as "pimpled Hazlitt", accused him of ignorance, dishonesty, and obscenity, and incorporated vague physical threats.
Often he was seen in the company of his son and son's fiancée.
Several more of the kind followed over the next few months, at least one in ''The Examiner''.
In October 1812, Hazlitt was hired by ''The Morning Chronicle'' as a parliamentary reporter.
His brother, John, had by now become a successful painter of miniature portraits.
This public blunder placed a further strain on his relations with both Coleridge and Wordsworth, which were already fraying for other reasons.
Personally, he was rarely comfortable in middle- and upper-class female society, and, tormented by desires he later branded as "a perpetual clog and dead-weight upon the reason," he made an overture to a local woman while visiting the Lake District with Coleridge.
His portraits of such Tory politicians as Lord Eldon are unrelenting, as might be expected.
His part-time work as a drama critic provided him with an excuse to spend his evenings at the theatre.
He had however grossly misread her intentions and an altercation broke out which led to his precipitous retreat from the town under cover of darkness.
Certainly Hazlitt nowhere in his writings suggests that this marriage was the love match he had been seeking, nor does he mention his new wife at all.
He had earlier directed some of his most vitriolic attacks against them for having replaced the humanistic and revolutionary ideas of their earlier years with staunch support of the Establishment.
When this is the case, and you can expect as little justice as candour, you naturally in self-defence take refuge in a sort of misanthropy and cynical contempt for mankind."
*''The Complete Works of William Hazlitt.''
But, he asked, "what has a green-grocer's stall, a stupid English china warehouse, a putrid ''trattoria'', a barber's sign, an old clothes or old picture shop or a Gothic palace ... to do with ancient Rome?"
The couple had three sons over the next few years, Only one of their children, William, born in 1811, survived infancy.
Priestley, whom Hazlitt had read and who was also one of his teachers, was an impassioned commentator on political issues of the day.
(Enough clues were present so that the identity of the writer did not remain hidden for long.)
His last words were reported to have been "Well, I've had a happy life".
He was able to get more work as a portrait painter as well.
Relatively little is known of Hazlitt's other activities in this period.
More trouble was brewing, however.
Likewise, the philosopher in Hazlitt emerges in his account of the following morning: "We had a pleasant walk the next morning along the side of the lake under the grey cliffs, the green hills and azure sky....the snowy ridges that seemed close to us at Vevey receding farther into a kind of lofty background as we advanced....
He interweaves quotations from literature old and new, helping drive his points home with concentrated allusiveness and wielded extraordinarily efficiently as a critical instrument.
His mind nearly snapped.
He would sometimes see his son and even his wife, with whom he remained on speaking terms, but they were effectively separated.
In his days as a political reporter he had observed many of them at close range.
Hazlitt concludes his diatribe by refocusing on himself: "...have I not reason to hate and to despise myself?
Hazlitt in the meantime had not forsaken his painterly ambitions.
The schooling he received there, though relatively brief, approximately two years,  made a deep and abiding impression on Hazlitt.
As comfortable as Hazlitt was on settling in again to his home on Down Street in London in late 1825 (where he remained until about mid-1827), the reality of earning a living again stared him in the face.
He continued to provide a stream of contributions to various periodicals, primarily ''The New Monthly Magazine''.
One idea that particularly bore fruit was that of a series of articles called "Table-Talk".
As Ralph Wardle put it, before Hazlitt wrote this book, "no one had ever attempted a comprehensive study of all of Shakespeare, play by play, that readers could read and reread with pleasure as a guide to their understanding and appreciation".
His praise of the poet Thomas Campbell has been cited as one major instance where Hazlitt's critical judgement proved wrong.
He was perhaps overly self-disparaging in this self-portrait, but it opens a window on the kind of life Hazlitt was leading at this time, and how he evaluated it in contrast to the lives of his more overtly successful contemporaries.
Before Hazlitt and his new bride set off for the continent, he submitted, among the miscellany of essays that year, one to the ''New Monthly'' on "Jeremy Bentham", the first in a series entitled "Spirits of the Age".
There were philosophers, social reformers, poets, politicians, and a few who did not fall neatly into any of these categories.
The essay "On a Sun-Dial", which appeared late in 1827, may have been written during a second tour to Italy with his wife and son.
He also familiarized himself with the works of Edmund Burke, whose writing style impressed him enormously.
The arrangement seems to have had a strong element of convenience for both of them.
Nonetheless, the experience impressed on the young Hazlitt, at 20, the sense that not only philosophy, to which he had devoted himself, but also poetry warranted appreciation for what it could teach, and the three-week visit stimulated him to pursue his own thinking and writing.
Hazlitt also visited various picture galleries, and he began to get work doing portraits, painting somewhat in the style of Rembrandt.
It did not help that, when painting commissioned portraits, he refused to sacrifice his artistic integrity to the temptation to flatter his subjects for remunerative gain.
*''Selected Essays.''
He dreamed of marrying her, but that would require a divorce from Sarah Hazlitt—no easy matter.
Schlegel did (though he approves of many of Schlegel's judgements and quotes him liberally).
As he had befriended Stendhal in Paris, so in Florence, besides visiting the picture galleries, he struck up a friendship with Walter Savage Landor.
He had thoroughly absorbed a belief in liberty and the rights of man, and confidence in the idea that the mind was an active force which, by disseminating knowledge in both the sciences and the arts, could reinforce the natural tendency in humanity toward the good.
Aside from residing with his father as he strove to find his own voice and work out his philosophical ideas, Hazlitt also stayed over with his older brother John, who had studied under Joshua Reynolds and was following a career as a portrait painter.
Patmore soon became a friend as well as Hazlitt's confidant in the most troubled period of the latter's life.
Having idolised Napoleon for years, Hazlitt took it as a personal blow.
He was also constantly considering the manners of the people and the differences between the English and the French (and later, to a lesser extent, the Italians and Swiss).
Hazlitt can scarcely conceal his enthusiasm for such poems as Gertrude of Wyoming, but neither the poems nor Hazlitt's judgement of them have withstood the test of time.
Hazlitt, like Thomas de Quincey and many others afterwards, was swept off his feet by Coleridge's dazzlingly erudite eloquence.
No thesis is overtly stated, but some thoughts are developed consistently throughout.
London: Penguin Books, 2000.
Nor did he have access to all the materials that Scott's stature and connections had provided him with for his own life of Napoleon.
He settled in modest lodgings on Half-Moon Street, and thereafter waged an unending battle against poverty, as he found himself forced to grind out a stream of mostly undistinguished articles for weeklies like ''The Atlas'' to generate desperately needed cash.
In some ways the French seemed superior to his countrymen.
Writing for so highly respected a publication was considered a major step up from writing for weekly papers, and Hazlitt was proud of this connection.
"In judging of nations, it will not do to deal in mere abstractions", he concluded.
Yet, although his use of quotations is (as many critics have felt) as fine as any author's has ever been, all too often he gets the quotes wrong.
Yet, softening the asperities of his critique, Hazlitt rounds out his sketch by conceding that "Mr. Malthus's style is correct and elegant; his tone of controversy mild and gentlemanly; and the care with which he has brought his facts and documents together, deserves the highest praise".
With few commissions for painting, Hazlitt seized the opportunity to ready for publication his philosophical treatise, which, according to his son, he had completed by 1803.
One, unlike an earlier response to the ''Blackwood's'' attack that never saw the light of day, was published, as ''A Letter to William Gifford, Esq.''
Edited by P. P. Howe.
He was so enchanted with the region even apart from its personal and literary associations that he remained there with his wife for three months, renting a floor of a farmhouse named "Gelamont" outside of town, where "every thing was perfectly clean and commodious".
It was in this period also that he came across Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who became one of the most important influences on the budding philosopher's thinking.
But the rumours that had been spread demonising Hazlitt, along with the vilifications of the Tory press, not only hurt his pride but seriously obstructed his ability to earn a living.
His first impression was one of disappointment.
"In countries, as well as individuals, there is a mixture of good and bad qualities; yet we attempt to strike a general balance, and compare the rules with the exceptions".
It was at this juncture that Hazlitt met Samuel Taylor Coleridge.
In order to ascertain Sarah's true character, he persuaded an acquaintance to take lodgings in the Walkers' building and attempt to seduce Sarah.
The place was for the most part an oasis of tranquility for Hazlitt.
By 1802, his work was considered good enough that a portrait he had recently painted of his father was accepted for exhibition by the Royal Academy.
He was forced to revise his opinions repeatedly.
Pressed for money as always, he continued to write for various periodicals, including ''The Edinburgh Review''.
These essays, structured in the loose manner of table talk, were written in the "familiar style" of the sort devised two centuries earlier by Montaigne, whom Hazlitt greatly admired.
Edited by P. P. Howe, after the edition of A. R. Waller and Arnold Glover.
Hazlitt felt such a closeness to the old artist that in his conversations, Northcote was transformed into a kind of alter ego.
On 1 September 1824, Hazlitt and his wife began a tour of the European continent, crossing the English Channel by steamboat from Brighton to Dieppe and proceeding from there by coach and sometimes on foot to Paris and Lyon, crossing the Alps in Savoy, then continuing through Italy to Florence and Rome, the most southerly point on their route.
It has also been noted, however, that the book is more than a mere portrait gallery.
