A good example of the transfer system in operation is provided by the first motet from the 1605 set (''Suscepimus Deus'' a5) in which the text used for the ''Introit'' has to be reused in a shortened form for the Gradual.
During his later years Byrd also added to his output of consort songs, a number of which were discovered by Philip Brett and Thursday Dart in Harvard in 1961.
In stylistic terms the motets of the ''Gradualia'' form a sharp contrast to those of the ''Cantiones sacrae'' publications.
As well as Morley, his pupils included, Peter Philips,  Thomas Tomkins and probably Thomas Weelkes,  the first two of whom were important contributors to the Elizabethan and Jacobean virginalist school.
The consort song, which was the most popular form of vernacular polyphony in England in the third quarter of the sixteenth century, was a solo song for a high voice (often sung by a boy) accompanied by a consort of four consort instruments (normally viols).
The two monopolists took advantage of the patent to produce a grandiose joint publication under the title ''Cantiones quae ab argumento sacrae vocantur''.
Byrd's setting of the first four verses of Psalm 78 (''Deus venerunt gentes'') is widely believed to refer to the brutal execution of Fr Edmund Campion in 1581 an event that caused widespread revulsion on the Continent as well as in England.
A second directive, dated 29 November, issued detailed instructions regarding Byrd's use of the organ in the liturgy.
The liturgy requires repeated settings of the word "''Alleluia''", and Byrd provides a wide variety of different settings forming brilliantly conceived miniature fantasias which are one of the most striking features of the two sets.
Poetically, the set (together with other evidence) reflects Byrd's involvement with the literary circle surrounding Sir Philip Sidney, whose influence at Court was at its height in the early 1580s.
It was a collection of 34 Latin motets dedicated to the Queen herself, accompanied by elaborate prefatory matter including poems in Latin elegiacs by the schoolmaster Richard Mulcaster and the young courtier Ferdinand Heybourne (aka Richardson).
He also raised the consort song, the church anthem and the Anglican service setting to new heights.
The final words ''dona nobis pacem'' ("grant us peace"), which are set to chains of anguished suspensions in the Four-Part Mass and expressive block homophony in the five-part setting, almost certainly reflect the aspirations of the troubled Catholic community of the 1590s.
Dow included Latin distichs and quotations in praise of Byrd in his manuscript collection of music, the Dow Partbooks (GB Och 984-988), while Baldwin included a long doggerel poem in his commonplace book (GB Lbm Roy App 24 d 2) ranking Byrd at the head of the musicians of his day:
Long imitative paragraphs are the exception, often kept for final climactic sections in the minority of extended motets.
Byrd would almost certainly have published it if the technical means had been available to do so.
But the most popular item in the set was the Lullaby (''Lullay lullaby'') which blends the tradition of the dramatic lament with the cradle-songs found in some early boy-plays and medieval mystery plays.
Thanks largely to the research of John Harley, knowledge of Byrd's biography has expanded in recent years.
The collection includes a series of ten pavans and galliards in the usual three-strain form with embellished repeats of each strain.
(''A Fancie'' no 36).
In ''The Compleat Gentleman'' (1622) Henry Peacham (1576–1643) praised Byrd in lavish terms as a composer of sacred music:
They are dedicated to two members of the Catholic nobility, Henry Howard, 1st Earl of Northampton and Byrd's own patron Sir John Petre, who had been elevated to the peerage in 1603 under the title Lord Petre of Writtle.
Together with two sets of English songs, discussed below, these collections, dedicated to powerful Elizabethan lords (Edward Somerset, 4th Earl of Worcester and John Lumley, 1st Baron Lumley), probably formed part of Byrd's campaign to re-establish himself in Court circles after the reverses of the 1580s.
With the influx of missionary priests trained at the English College, Douai, (now in France but then part of the Spanish Netherlands) and in Rome from the 1570s onwards, relations between the authorities and the Catholic community took a further turn for the worse.
Residing at what is now 6 Minster Yard Lincoln, he remained in post until 1572.
A special feature of the four-part and five-part Masses is Byrd's treatment of the ''Agnus Dei'', which employ the technique which Byrd had previously applied to the petitionary clauses from the motets of the 1589 and 1591 ''Cantiones sacrae''.
The latter include the ''Ground in Gamut'' (described as "Mr Byrd's old ground") by his future pupil Thomas Tomkins, the A minor Fantasia, and probably the first of Byrd's great series of keyboard pavanes and galliards, a composition which was transcribed by Byrd from an original for five-part consort.
His ''Short Service'', an unpretentious setting of items for the Anglican Matins, Communion and Evensong services, which seems to have been designed to comply with the Protestant reformers’ demand for clear words and simple musical textures, may well have been composed during the Lincoln years.
The seven ''In Nomine'' settings for consort (two a4 and five a5), at least one of the consort fantasias (''Neighbour'' F1 a6) and a number of important keyboard works were apparently composed during  the Lincoln years.
:Whose greater skill and knowledge dothe excelle all at this time
Byrd's 1588 collection, which complicates the form as he inherited it from Robert Parsons, Richard Farrant and others, reflects this tradition.
''Sternhold and Hopkins Psalter'', 1562) with each line prefigured by imitation in the accompanying instruments.
They may also reflect the fact that Byrd's fellow monopolist Tallis and his printer Thomas Vautrollier had died, thus creating a more propitious climate for publishing ventures.
:And far to strange countries abrode his skill dothe shyne...
To avoid having to set the same text twice, Byrd often resorted to a cross-reference or "transfer" system which allowed a single setting to be slotted into a different place in the liturgy.
From the early 1570s onwards Byrd became increasingly involved with Catholicism, which, as the scholarship of the last half-century has demonstrated, became a major factor in his personal and creative life.
His period at Lincoln was not entirely trouble-free, for on 19 November 1569 the Dean and Chapter cited him for 'certain matters alleged against him' as the result of which his salary was suspended.
He virtually created the Tudor consort and keyboard fantasia, having only the most primitive models to follow.
The verse of the ''Introit'' is normally set as a semichoir section, returning to full choir scoring for the ''Gloria Patri''.
''Mass for Four Voices'', or the Four-Part Mass, which according to Joseph Kerman was probably the first to be composed, is partly modelled on John Taverner's ''Mean Mass'', a highly regarded early Tudor setting which Byrd would probably have sung as a choirboy.
Byrd replied the following year with a setting of the defiant continuation, set, like de Monte's piece, in eight parts and incorporating a three-part canon by inversion.
In 1999, Davitt Moroney's recording of Byrd's complete keyboard music was released on Hyperion (CDA66551/7; re-issued as CDS44461/7).
Shortly afterwards Byrd and Tallis were jointly granted a patent for the printing of music and ruled music paper for 21 years, one of a number of patents issued by the Crown for the printing of books on various subjects.
In his will, dated 15 November 1622, he describes himself as "in the 80th year of my age", suggesting a birthdate of 1542 or 1543.
The poem as a whole has been interpreted as an elegy for the Catholic martyr Saint Anne Line, who was executed on 27 February 1601 for harbouring priests.
Byrd's output of Anglican church music (defined in the strictest sense as sacred music designed for performance in church) is surprisingly small, but it stretches the limits of elaboration then regarded as acceptable by some reforming Protestants who regarded highly wrought music as a distraction from the Word of God.
The songs include elegies for public figures such as the Earl of Essex (1601) and Henry Prince of Wales (1612).
The first, ''Psalms, Sonnets and Songs of Sadness and Pietie'' (1588) consists mainly of adapted consort songs, which Byrd, probably guided by commercial instincts, had turned into vocal part-songs by adding words to the accompanying instrumental parts and labelling the original solo voice as "the first singing part".
Particularly striking examples of these are the final section of ''Tribulatio proxima est'' (1589) and the multi-sectional ''Infelix ego'' (1591), a large-scale motet which takes its point of departure from ''Tribue Domine'' of 1575.
Byrd's setting is on a massive scale, requiring five-part ''Decani'' and ''Cantoris'' groupings in antiphony, block homophony and five, six and eight-part counterpoint with verse (solo) sections for added variety.
Despite the financial failure of the publication,  some of his other collections sold well, while Elizabethan scribes such as the Oxford academic Robert Dow, the Windsor lay clerk John Baldwin, and a school of scribes working for the Norfolk country gentleman Sir Edward Paston copied his music extensively.
In 2010, The Cardinall's Musick under the direction of Andrew Carwood completed their recorded survey of Byrd's Latin church music.
Queen Elizabeth (1558–1603) was a moderate Protestant who eschewed the more extreme forms of Puritanism and retained a fondness for elaborate ritual, besides being a music lover and keyboard player herself.
Although not representing Byrd at his most profound, it achieved great popularity and is of incidental interest for the information which it gives on sixteenth-century English military calls.
It was probably composed near the end of the reign of Queen Mary Tudor (1553–1558), who revived Sarum liturgical practices.
The appearance of these two monumental collections of Catholic polyphony reflects the hopes which the recusant community must have harboured for an easier life under the new king James I, whose mother, Mary Queen of Scots, had been a Catholic.
Since many of the motet texts of the 1589 and 1591 sets are pathetic in tone, it is not surprising that many of them continue and develop the 'affective-imitative' vein found in some motets from the 1570s, though in a more concise and concentrated form.
A contemporary account which sheds light on the circulation of the music between Catholic country houses, refers to the arrest of a young Frenchman named Charles de Ligny, who was followed from an unidentified country house by spies, apprehended, searched and found to be carrying a copy of the 1605 set.
Byrd's last collection of English songs was'' Psalms, Songs and Sonnets'', published in 1611 (when Byrd was over 70) and dedicated to Francis Clifford, 4th Earl of Cumberland, who later also received the dedication of Thomas Campion's'' First Book of Songs'' in about 1613.
The three composers are nicely differentiated by seniority, with Byrd, Bull and Gibbons represented respectively by eight, seven and six items.
:Yet let not straingers bragg, nor they these soe commende,
Some of them show the influence of the motets of Alfonso Ferrabosco I (1543–1588), a Bolognese musician who worked in the Tudor court at intervals between 1562 and 1578.
Byrd sets it in three sections, each beginning with a semichoir passage in archaic style.
''The Battle'', which was apparently inspired by an unidentified skirmish in Elizabeth's Irish wars, is a sequence of movements bearing titles such as "The marche to fight", "The battells be joyned" and "The Galliarde for the victorie".
It is likely that this practice was an expression of Elizabethan Catholic nostalgia, as a number of the texts suggest.
Petre held clandestine Mass celebrations, with music provided by his servants, which were subject to the unwelcome attention of spies and paid informers working for the Crown.
Others are dramatic elegies, intended to be performed in the boy-plays which were popular in Tudor London.
However, all three cycles also include ''Kyrie''s, a rare feature in Sarum Rite mass settings, which usually omitted it because of the use of tropes on festal occasions in the Sarum Rite.
These include some of his most famous compositions, notably ''Praise our Lord, all ye Gentiles'' (a6) ''This day Christ was born'' (a6) and ''Have mercy upon me'' (a6) which employs alternating phrases with verse and full scoring and also circulated as a church anthem.
Unfortunately, this practice sometimes causes confusion, partly because normally no rubrics are printed to make the required transfer clear and partly because there are some errors which complicate matters still further.
Having grown up in an age in which Latin polyphony was largely confined to liturgical items for the Sarum rite, he assimilated and mastered the Continental motet form of his day, employing a highly personal synthesis of English and continental models.
These include his setting of the Easter responsory ''Christus resurgens'' (a4) which was not published until 1605, but which as part of the Sarum liturgy could also have been composed during Mary's reign, as well as ''Alleluia confitemini (a3)'' which combines two liturgical items for Easter week.
Byrd had two brothers, Symond and John, who became London merchants, and four sisters, Alice, Barbara, Mary, and Martha.
The inclusion of ''Laudate pueri'' (a6) which proves to be an instrumental fantasia with words added after composition, is one sign that Byrd had some difficulty in assembling enough material for the collection.
As early as 1575 Richard Mulcaster and Ferdinand Haybourne praised Byrd, together with Tallis, in poems published in the Tallis/Byrd ''Cantiones''.
The principal virginalist composers died off in the 1620s (except for  Giles Farnaby, who died in 1640, and Thomas Tomkins, who lived on until 1656) and found no real successors.
The contents show Byrd's mastery of a wide variety of keyboard forms, though liturgical compositions based on plainsong are not represented.
42) and others lighter and more Italianate in tone.
According to Harley, Thomas Byrd, the grandson of Richard Byrd of Ingatestone, Essex, probably moved to London in the 15th century.
A famous passage from Thomas Morley's ''A Plaine and Easie Introduction to Practicall Musicke'' (1597) supports the view that the madrigal had superseded the motet in the favour of Catholic patrons, a fact which may explain why Byrd composed few non-liturgical motets after 1591.
''Domine praestolamur'' (1589) is a good example of this style, laid out in imitative paragraphs based on subjects which characteristically emphasise the expressive minor second and minor sixth, with continuations which subsequently break off and are heard separately (another technique which Byrd had learnt from his study of Ferrabosco).
Byrd also bowed to tradition by setting two carols in the traditional form with alternating verses and burdens,  (''From Virgin's womb this day did spring, An earthly tree, a heavenly fruit, both a6'') and even included an ''anthem'', a setting of the Easter prose ''Christ rising again'' which also circulated in church choir manuscripts with organ accompaniment.
Byrd's exceptionally long lifespan meant that he lived into an age in which many of the forms of vocal and instrumental music which he had made his own were beginning to lose their appeal to most musicians.
Byrd set three of the songs from Sidney's sonnet sequence ''Astrophel and Stella'', as well as poems by other members of the Sidney circle, and also included two elegies on Sidney's death in the Battle of Zutphen in 1586.
The single five-part fantasia, which is apparently an early work, includes a canon at the upper fourth.
In more recent times Joseph Kerman, Oliver Neighbour, Philip Brett, John Harley, Richard Turbet, Alan Brown, Kerry McCarthy, and others have made major contributions to increasing our understanding of Byrd's life and music.
Byrd also contributed eight keyboard pieces to ''Parthenia'' (winter 1612–13), a collection of 21 keyboard pieces engraved by William Hole, and containing music by Byrd, John Bull and Orlando Gibbons.
However, by the time Byrd died in 1623 the English musical landscape was undergoing profound changes.
In the Roman liturgy there are many texts which appear repeatedly in different liturgical contexts.
A few motets, especially in the 1591 set, abandon traditional motet style and resort to vivid word painting which reflects the growing popularity of the madrigal (''Haec dies'', 1591).
The 1560s were also important formative years for Byrd the composer.
Byrd's small output of church anthems ranges in style from relatively sober early examples (''O Lord, make thy servant Elizabeth our queen'' (a6) and ''How long shall mine enemies'' (a5) ) to other, evidently late works such as ''Sing joyfully'' (a6) which is close in style to the English motets of Byrd's 1611 set, discussed below.
On 11 September 1591 John Baldwin, a tenor lay-clerk at St George's Chapel, Windsor and later a colleague of Byrd in the Chapel Royal, completed the copying of ''My Ladye Nevells Booke'', a collection of 42 of Byrd's keyboard pieces, which was probably produced under Byrd's supervision and includes corrections which are thought to be in the composer's hand.
The first stage in this undertaking comprised the three Ordinary of the Mass cycles (in four, three and five parts), which were published by Thomas East between 1592 and 1595.
It even includes a complete three-strain galliard, followed by an expansive coda (for a performance on YouTube, see under 'External links' below).
In 1602, Byrd's patron Edward Somerset, 4th Earl of Worcester, discussing Court fashions in music, predicted that "in winter lullaby, an owld song of Mr Birde, wylbee more in request as I thinke."
Nevertheless, the source material shows that it was sung in York Minster as well as Durham, Worcester and Cambridge, in the early seventeenth century..
Some texts should probably be interpreted as warnings against spies (''Vigilate, nescitis enim'') or lying tongues (''Quis est homo'') or celebration of the memory of martyred priests (''O quam gloriosum'').
Thomas Morley, Byrd's other major composing pupil, devoted himself to the cultivation of the madrigal, a form in which Byrd himself took little interest.
It is followed by ''The Barley Break'' (a mock-battle follows a real one), a light-hearted piece which follows the progress of a game of "barley-break", a version of the game now known as "piggy in the middle", played by three couples with a ball.
It is dedicated to William Petre (the son of Byrd's patron Sir John Petre, 1st Baron Petre) who was only 15 years old in 1591 and could hardly have played it if it had been composed much earlier.
The five-part section includes vocal part-songs which show the influence of the "adapted consort song" style of the 1588 set but which seem to have been conceived as all-vocal part-songs.
All three works contain retrospective features harking back to the earlier Tudor tradition of Mass settings which had lapsed after 1558, along with others which reflect Continental influence and the liturgical practices of the foreign-trained incoming missionary priests.
The continued adherence of Byrd and his family to Catholicism continued to cause him difficulties, though a surviving reference to a lost petition apparently written by Byrd to Robert Cecil, Earl of Salisbury sometime between 1605 and 1612 suggests that he had been allowed to practise his religion under licence during the reign of Elizabeth.
Moreover, one of Byrd's earliest compositions was a collaboration with two Chapel Royal singing-men, John Sheppard and William Mundy, on a setting for four male voices of the psalm ''In exitu Israel'' for the procession to the font in Easter week.
Byrd's set includes two consort fantasias (a4 and a6) as well as eleven English motets, most of them setting prose texts from the Bible.
Byrd obtained the prestigious post of Gentleman of the Chapel Royal in 1572 following the death of Robert Parsons, a gifted composer who drowned in the Trent near Newark on 25 January of that year.
Other items from the three-part and four-part section are in a lighter vein, employing a line-by-line imitative technique and a predominant crotchet pulse (''The nightingale so pleasant (a3), Is love a boy?
All three Mass cycles employ other early Tudor features, notably the mosaic of semichoir sections alternating with full sections in the four-part and five-part Masses, the use of a semichoir section to open the ''Gloria'', ''Credo'', and ''Agnus Dei'', and the head-motif which links the openings of all the movements of a cycle.
Some of the more festive items, especially in the 1607 set, feature vivid madrigalesque word-painting.
Taverner's influence is particularly clear in the scale figures rising successively through a fifth, a sixth and a seventh in Byrd's setting of the ''Sanctus''.
Normally, Byrd includes the ''Introit'', the Gradual, the ''Alleluia'' (or Tract in Lent if needed), the Offertory and Communion.
Ferrabosco's motets provided direct models for Byrd's ''Emendemus in melius'' (a5), ''O lux beata Trinitas'' (a6), ''Domine secundum actum meum'' (a6) and ''Siderum rector'' (a5) as well as a more generalised paradigm for what Joseph Kerman has called Byrd's 'affective-imitative' style, a method of setting pathetic texts in extended paragraphs based on subjects employing curving lines in fluid rhythm and contrapuntal techniques which Byrd learnt from his study of Ferrabosco.
In about 1594 Byrd's career entered a new phase.
In 1583 De Monte sent Byrd his setting of verses 1–4 of Vulgate Psalm 136 (''Super flumina Babylonis''), including the pointed question "How shall we sing the Lord's song in a strange land?"
The ''Kyrie'' of the three-part Mass is set in a simple litany-like style, but the other ''Kyrie'' settings employ dense imitative polyphony.
The dedicatee long remained unidentified, but John Harley's researches into the heraldic design on the fly-leaf have shown that she was Lady Elizabeth Neville, the third wife of Sir Henry Neville of Billingbear House, Berkshire, who was a Justice of the Peace and a warden of Windsor Great Park.
Byrd remained in Stondon Massey until his death on 4 July 1623, which was noted in the Chapel Royal Check Book in a unique entry describing him as "a Father of Musick".
Two exceptional large-scale psalm motets, ''Ad Dominum cum tribularer'' (a8) and ''Domine quis habitabit'' (a9), are Byrd's contribution to a paraliturgicall form  cultivated by Robert White and Robert Parsons.
For obvious reasons, the ''Gradualia'' never achieved the popularity of Byrd's earlier works.
Byrd was an active and influential teacher.
The Marian hymns from the 1605 ''Gradualia'' are set in a light line-by-line imitative counterpoint with crotchet pulse which recalls the three-part English songs from Songs of sundrie natures (1589).
Byrd had also taken serious strides with instrumental music.
Many of the songs follow, and develop further, types already established in the 1589 collection.
The ''Alleluia'' verse, together with the closing ''Alleluia'', normally form an item in themselves, while the Offertory and the Communion are set as they stand.
Finally, despite a general aversion to the madrigal, he succeeded in cultivating secular vocal music in an impressive variety of forms in his three sets of 1588, 1589 and 1611.
His Cantiones Sacrae, as also his Gradualia, are mere Angelicall and Divine; and being of himself naturally disposed to Gravity and Piety, his vein is not so much for leight Madrigals or Canzonets, yet his Virginella and some others in his first Set, cannot be mended by the best Italian of them all."
He produced sacred music for use in Anglican services, although he himself became a Roman Catholic in later life and wrote Catholic sacred music as well.
Byrd's contributions to the ''Cantiones'' are in various different styles, although his forceful musical personality is stamped on all of them.
Byrd provides a cadential break at the cut-off point.
Byrd's wife Julian was first cited for recusancy (refusing to attend Anglican services) at Harlington in Middlesex, where the family now lived, in 1577.
It is at any rate clear that Byrd was composing Anglican church music, for when he left Lincoln the Dean and Chapter continued to pay him at a reduced rate on condition that he would send the cathedral his compositions.
However a document dated 2 October 1598 written in his own hand states that he is "58 yeares or ther abouts", indicating an earlier birthdate of 1539 or 1540.
The ''Songs of Sundrie Natures'' (1589) contain sections in three, four, five and six parts, a format which follows the plan of many Tudor manuscript collections of household music and was probably intended to emulate the madrigal collection ''Musica transalpina'', which had appeared in print the previous year.
Addressing Petre (who is known to have lent him money to advance the printing of the collection), Byrd describes the contents of the 1607 set as "blooms collected in your own garden and rightfully due to you as tithes", thus making explicit the fact that they had formed part of Catholic religious observances in the Petre household.
Perhaps his most impressive achievement as a composer was his ability to transform so many of the main musical forms of his day and stamp them with his own identity.
In 1597 Byrd's pupil Thomas Morley dedicated his treatise ''A Plaine and Easie Introduction to Practicall Musicke'' to Byrd in flattering terms, though he may have intended to counterbalance this in the main text by some sharply satirical references to a mysterious "Master Bold".
In 1586 he attended a gathering at a country house in the company of Father Henry Garnett (later executed for complicity in the Gunpowder Plot) and the Catholic poet Robert Southwell.
The collection also includes two famous pieces of programme music.
Byrd's set contains compositions in a wide variety of musical styles, reflecting the variegated character of the texts which he was setting.
Some items are, however, more tinged with madrigalian influence than their counterparts in the earlier set, making clear that the short-lived madrigal vogue of the 1590s had not completely passed Byrd by.
He was required to pay heavy fines for recusancy.
This has led scholars from Kerman onwards to believe that Byrd was reinterpreting biblical and liturgical texts in a contemporary context and writing laments and petitions on behalf of the persecuted Catholic community, which seems to have adopted Byrd as a kind of 'house' composer.
The fantasias and voluntaries in Nevell also cover a wide stylistic range, some being austerely contrapuntal (''A voluntarie'', no.
Thirty-seven of Byrd's motets were published in two sets of ''Cantiones sacrae'', which appeared in 1589 and 1591.
Two magnificent large-scale compositions are the ''Browning'', a set of 20 variations on a popular melody (also known as "The leaves be green") which evidently originated as a celebration of the ripening of nuts in autumn, and an elaborate ground on the formula known as the ''Goodnight Ground''.
(The only exception is the Ninth Pavan, which is a set of variations on the passamezzo antico bass.)
There is no documentary evidence concerning Byrd's early musical training.
:Which I shoulde heve sett first, for soe it was my will,
They include three motets which employ the old-fashioned cantus firmus technique as well as the most famous item in the 1589 collection, ''Ne irascaris Domine''.
As the title of Byrd's collection implies, consort songs varied widely in character.
Kerry McCarthy has pointed out that the York Minster manuscript of the Great Service was copied by a vicar-choral named John Todd, apparently between 1597–99, and is described as 'Mr Byrd's new sute of service for means'.
Byrd also played a role in the emergence of the new verse anthem, which seems to have evolved in part from the practice of adding vocal refrains to consort songs.
Byrd himself appears in the recusancy lists from 1584.
He moved with his family from Harlington to Stondon Massey, a small village near Chipping Ongar in Essex.
'''William Byrd''' (; birth date variously given as c.1539/40 or 1543 – 4 July 1623, by the Julian calendar, 14 July 1623, by the Gregorian calendar) was an English composer of the Renaissance.
The melodic writing often breaks into quaver (eighth-note) motion, tending to undermine the minim (half-note) pulse with surface detail.
His two brothers were choristers at St. Paul's Cathedral, and Byrd may have been a chorister there as well under Simon Westcote, although it is possible that he was a chorister with the Chapel Royal.
This series of thirteen recordings is the first time that all Byrd's Latin music is available on disc.
His ownership of Stondon Place, where he lived for the rest of his life, was bitterly contested by Joanna Shelley, with whom he engaged in a protracted and unedifying legal dispute lasting about a decade and a half.
This career move vastly increased Byrd's opportunities to widen his scope as a composer and also to make contacts at Court.
Byrd is honoured together with John Merbecke and Thomas Tallis with a feast day on the liturgical calendar of the US Episcopal Church on 21 November.
A good example of the last type is the ''Fantasia a6 (No 2)'' which begins with a sober imitative paragraph before progressively more fragmented textures (working in a quotation from ''Greensleeves'' at one point).
Despite the efforts of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century antiquarians, the reversal of this judgement had to wait for the pioneering work of twentieth-century scholars from E. H. Fellowes onwards.
Nevertheless, he regularly appeared in the quarterly local assizes and was reported to the archdeaconry court for non-attendance at the parish church.
The editions are undated (dates can be established only by close bibliographic analysis) do not name the printer and consist of only one bifolium per partbook to aid concealment, reminders that the possession of heterodox books was still highly dangerous.
Many were settings of metrical psalms, in which the solo voice sings a melody in the manner of the numerous metrical psalm collections of the day (e.g.
All these show Byrd gradually emerging as a major figure on the Elizabethan musical landscape.
Byrd enjoyed a high reputation among English musicians.
Byrd's acquaintance with the Petre family extended back at least to 1581 (as his surviving autograph letter of that year shows) and he spent two weeks at the Petre household over Christmas in 1589.
Similar treatment applies to the Gradual verse, which is normally attached to the opening ''Alleluia'' to form a single item.
However, from the 1570s onwards he is found associating with known Catholics, including Lord Thomas Paget, to whom he wrote a petitionary letter on behalf of an unnamed friend in about 1573.
In 1588 and 1589 Byrd also published two collections of English songs.
The 1580s were also a productive decade for Byrd as a composer of instrumental music.
:An Englishman, by name, William BIRDE for his skill
Byrd's contribution includes the famous ''Earl of Salisbury Pavan'', composed in memory of Robert Cecil, 1st Earl of Salisbury, who had died on 24 May 1612, and its two accompanying galliards.
There are also a number of compositions which do not conform to this stylistic pattern.
In particular there is a persistent emphasis on themes such as the persecution of the chosen people (''Domine praestolamur'' a5) the Babylonian or Egyptian captivity (''Domine tu iurasti'') and the long-awaited coming of deliverance (''Laetentur caeli'', ''Circumspice Jerusalem'').
Byrd's contribution to the ''Cantiones'' also includes compositions in a more forward-looking manner which point the way to his motets of the 1580s.
It was evidently at the behest of this circle of friends that Byrd now embarked on a grandiose programme to provide a cycle of liturgical music covering all the principal feasts of the Catholic Church calendar.
Others refer to local notabilities or incidents from the Norfolk area.
Some of the hymns and antiphons for keyboard and for consort may also date from this period, though it is also possible that the consort pieces may have been composed in Lincoln for the musical training of choirboys.
He was now in his early fifties, and seems to have gone into semi-retirement from the Chapel Royal.
In 1577 Byrd and Tallis were forced to petition Queen Elizabeth for financial help, pleading that the publication had "fallen oute to oure greate losse" and that Tallis was now "verie aged".
A wealthy local landowner, Petre was a discreet Catholic who maintained two local manor houses, Ingatestone Hall and Thorndon Hall, the first of which still survives in a much-altered state.
Byrd's four Anglican service settings range in style from the unpretentious Short Service, already discussed, to the magnificent so-called Great Service, a grandiose work which continues a tradition of opulent settings by Richard Farrant, William Mundy and Robert Parsons.
As John Harley has shown, it is probable that Byrd's parental family were Protestants, though whether by deeply felt conviction or nominal conformism is not clear.
Byrd's first known professional employment was his appointment in 1563 as organist and master of the choristers at Lincoln Cathedral.
Byrd himself may have held Protestant beliefs in his youth, for a recently discovered fragment of a setting of an English translation of Martin Luther's hymn "", which bears an attribution to "Birde" includes the line "From Turk and Pope defend us Lord".
:For they may now geve place and sett themselves behynde,
Like the five-and six-part consort fantasias, they sometimes feature a gradual increase in momentum after an imitative opening paragraph.
The native tradition of Latin music which Byrd had done so much to keep alive more or less died with him, while consort music underwent a huge change of character at the hands of a brilliant new generation of professional musicians at the Jacobean and Caroline courts.
In 1583 he got into serious trouble because of his association with Paget, who was suspected of involvement in the Throckmorton Plot, and for sending money to Catholics abroad.
William Byrd was born in London, the son of another Thomas Byrd about whom nothing further is known, and his wife, Margery.
The specific year of Byrd's birth is uncertain.
Byrd's last published compositions are four English anthems printed in Sir William Leighton's ''Teares or Lamentacions of a Sorrowfull Soule'' (1614).
This recording, which won the 2000 Gramophone Award in the Early Music category and a 2000 Jahrespreis der deutschen Schallplattenkritik, came with a 100-page essay by Moroney on Byrd's keyboard music.
The three-part section includes settings of metrical versions of the seven penitential psalms, in an archaic style which reflects the influence of the psalm collections.
He wrote in many of the forms current in England at the time, including various types of sacred and secular polyphony, keyboard (the so-called Virginalist school), and consort music.
The Great Service was in existence by 1606 (the last copying date entered in the  so-called Baldwin Commonplace Book) and may date back as far as the 1590s.
