Brandt had asked for Bahro's release, and Brandt welcomed Bahro's theories, which advanced the debate within his own Social Democratic Party.
received information that one of Brandt's personal assistants, Günter Guillaume, was a spy for the East German intelligence services.
In late 1989, Brandt became one of the first leftwing leaders in West Germany to publicly favor a quick reunification of Germany, instead of some sort of two-state federation or other kind of interim arrangement.
Other works of the foundation include the edition of Brandt's papers, speeches and letters (the Berlin Edition), historical research as well as organizing lectures and international conferences.
According to Helmut Schmidt, Willy Brandt's domestic reform programme had accomplished more than any previous programme for a comparable period.
Had this motion passed, Rainer Barzel would have replaced Brandt as chancellor.
In addition, increases were made in the pensions of 2.5 million war victims.
It was at this time that he adopted the pseudonym '''Willy Brandt''' to avoid detection by Nazi agents.
By 1974, three times as much was paid out in rent subsidies as in 1969, and nearly one and a half million households received rental assistance.
This concerned the East-West conflict and arms race where the SI held high level consultations with the leaderships of the United States and the Soviet Union.
Increases were made in public housing subsidies, as characterised by a 36% increase in the social housing budget in 1970 and by the introduction of a programme for the construction of 200,000 public housing units (1971).
At the start of 1961, U.S. President John F. Kennedy saw Brandt as the wave of the future in West Germany and was hoping he would replace Konrad Adenauer as chancellor following elections later in the year.
That same year, the Safety Institute of the Federal Republic of Germany was transformed into a public Federal Agency (Bundesanstalt) with significantly enlarged powers, in the context of which special emphasis would be placed on its new task of promoting and coordinating research in the area of accident prevention.
The main boulevard on the north entrance to Montenegrin capital Podgorica was named Willy Brandt Boulevard in 2011.
A flexible retirement age after 62 years was introduced (1972) for invalids and handicapped persons, and social assistance was extended to those who previously had to be helped by their relatives.
Under the Brandt Administration, West Germany attained a lower rate of inflation than in other industrialised countries at that time, while a rise in the standard of living took place, helped by the floating and revaluation of the mark.
During the 1972 campaign, many popular West German artists, intellectuals, writers, actors and professors supported Brandt and the SPD.
In Brandt's first year as mayor, he also served as the president of the Bundesrat in Bonn.
The Law on Compensation for Measures of Criminal Prosecution and Penalties, passed in March 1971, provided for standardized compensation in certain situations.
A matching fund program for 15 million employees was also introduced, which stimulated them to accumulate capital.
Pupils, students and children in kindergartens were incorporated into the accident insurance scheme, which benefited 11 million children.
At the 1969 elections, again with Brandt as the leading candidate, the SPD became stronger, and after three weeks of negotiations, the SPD formed a coalition government with the smaller Free Democratic Party of Germany (FDP).
They also met with the Secretaries General Leonid Brezhnev and Michail Gorbachev and with the Soviet President Andrei Gromyko.
In 1933, using his connections with the port and its ships, he left Germany for Norway to escape Nazi persecution.
The income replacement rate for employees who made full contributions was raised to 70% of average earnings.
As Brandt himself later said, "I was exhausted, for reasons which had nothing to do with the affair the Guillaume espionage scandal going on at the time."
One camp embraced all of the conservative parties, and most notably those West German residents and their families who had been driven west ("die Heimatvertriebenen") by Stalinist ethnic cleansing from Historical Eastern Germany, especially the part that was given to Poland as a consequence of the end of the war; western Czechoslovakia (the Sudetenland); and the rest of Eastern Europe, such as in Romania.
In 1965, Brandt ran again, but lost to the popular Ludwig Erhard.
That same year, compulsory health insurance was extended to the self-employed.
A law of July 1973 fixed the fundamental and minimum requirements regarding workers' dwellings, mainly concerning space, ventilation and lighting, protection against damp, heat and noise, power and heating facilities and sanitary installations.
The Third Social Welfare Amendment Act (1974) brought considerable improvements for the handicapped, those in need of care, and older persons, and a new fund of 100 million marks for disabled children was established.
From 3 October 1957 to 1966, Willy Brandt was Governing Mayor of Berlin, during a period of increasing tension in East-West relations that led to the construction of the Berlin Wall.
Brandt was dogged by scandals about serial adultery, and reportedly also struggled with alcohol and depression.
This law also introduced a new type of sickness insurance benefit, namely facilities for the early diagnosis of disease.
The '''', Brandt's landslide win was the beginning of the end; and Brandt's role in government started to decline.
This espionage affair is widely considered to have been just the trigger for Brandt's resignation, not the fundamental cause.
Rehabilitation measures were also extended, child supplements were expressed as percentages of standard amounts and were thus indexed to their changes, and grandparents of recipients were exempted from potential liability to reimburse expenditure of social assistance carrier.
In 1948, he joined the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) and became a German citizen again, formally adopting the pseudonym Willy Brandt as his legal name.
After passing his Abitur in 1932 at ''Johanneum zu Lübeck'', he became an apprentice at the shipbroker and ship's agent F.&nbsp;H. Bertling.
Apart from the discretionary service of disease prevention which had existed since 1923, insured persons now had a right in certain circumstances to medical examinations aimed at the early diagnosis of disease.
Under this law, higher rents were not recognised as "justified interest."
There were also 10 votes against the motion and three invalid ballots.
A law of January 1972 on the organization of labour in enterprises significantly extended the works council's right of cooperation and co-management in the matter of vocational training.
Those included the Middle East, where they helped to build contacts between Israel and the PLO, and also in Southern Africa and Central America.
From 1970 to 1971, an 18.1% increase in building permits for social housing units was made.
The Works Council was provided with greater authority while trade unions were given the right of entry into the factory "provided they informed the employer of their intention to do so," while a law was passed to encourage wider share ownership by workers and other rank-and-file employees.
The Housing Construction Modification Law (1971) increased the income-limit for access to low rent apartments under the social housing programme from 9,000 DM to 12,000 DM per annum plus 3,000 DM (instead of 2,400) for each family member.
A general provision of October 1970 determined in detail the circumstances in which the competent authority must take action on the basis of the act on the technical means of work.
German artist Johannes Heisig painted several portraits of Brandt of which one was unveiled as part of an honoring event at German Historical Institute Washington, DC on 18 March 2003.
Brandt was elected Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany.
Brandt's ''Ostpolitik'' led to a meltdown of the narrow majority Brandt's coalition enjoyed in the ''Bundestag''.
When the SPD moved its headquarters from Bonn back to Berlin in the mid-1990s, the new headquarters was named the "Willy Brandt Haus".
In addition, the income limits for eligibility for social housing were raised and adapted in order of general income trends.
As noted by the journalist and historian Marion Dönhoff,
The German baby-boom generation wanted to come to terms with the deeply conservative, bourgeois, and demanding parent generation.
Defense Minister Helmut Schmidt led the development of the first Joint Service Regulation ZDv 10/1 (Assistance for Innere Fuehrung, classified: restricted), which revitalized the concept of Innere Fuehrung while also affirming the value of the “citizen in uniform.” According to one study, as a result of this reform, “a strong civil mindset displaced the formerly dominant military mindset,” and forced the Bundeswehr’s elder generation to accept a new type of soldier envisioned by Schmidt.
The uprising occurred during the Nazi German military occupation of Poland, and the monument is to those killed by the German troops who suppressed the uprising and deported remaining ghetto residents to the concentration camps for extermination.
Participation in employer's health insurance was extended to four million employees.
If measurements showed or there was reason to assume that a noise level guide value of 90&nbsp;dB( A) may be exceeded at the place of work, then the authority had to instruct the employer to arrange check-ups of the employees concerned and these employees had to use personal noise protection devices.
Because of this stalemate, the Bundestag was dissolved and new elections were called.
A private German-language secondary school in Warsaw, Poland, is also named after Brandt.
Improvements and automatic adjustments of maintenance allowances for participants in vocational training measures were also carried out.
Brandt negotiated a peace treaty with Poland, and agreements on the boundaries between the two countries, signifying the official and long-delayed end of World War II.
Levels of social expenditure were increased, with more funds allocated towards housing, transportation, schools, and communication, and substantial federal benefits were provided for farmers.
In August 1940, he became a Norwegian citizen, receiving his passport from the Norwegian legation in Stockholm, where he lived until the end of the war.
The Hospital Financing Law (1972) secured the supply of hospitals and reduced the cost of hospital care, "defined the financing of hospital investment as a public responsibility, single states to issue plans for hospital development, and the federal government to bear the cost of hospital investment covered in the plans, rates for hospital care thus based on running costs alone, hospitals to ensure that public subsidies together with insurance fund payments for patients cover total costs".
Kennedy made this preference clear by inviting Brandt, the West German opposition leader, to an official meeting at the White House a month before meeting with Adenauer, the country's leader.
He joined the "Socialist Youth" in 1929 and the Social Democratic Party (SPD) in 1930.
Brandt was asked to continue working as usual, and he agreed to do so, even taking a private vacation with Guillaume.
War victim’s pensions went up by 5.5% in January 1971, and by 6.3% in January 1972.
This became known as the Brandt Report.
As a safeguard against radiation, a decree on the system of authorisations for medicaments treated with ionizing radiation or containing radioactive substances, in its version of 8 August 1967, was remodelled by a new Decree of 10 May 1971 which added some radionuclides to the list of medicaments which doctors in private practice were authorized to use.
To counter any notions about being sympathetic to Communism or soft on left-wing extremists, Brandt implemented tough legislation that barred "radicals" from public service ('''').
He was supported by the influential publisher Axel Springer.
In exile in Norway and Sweden Brandt learned Norwegian and Swedish.
A 1969 law on explosive materials was supplemented by two orders; the first (made in November 1969) establishing a committee of experts for explosive materials, while the second order (made the following month) included details for the implementation of the law on explosive materials.
He also wrote Kennedy a highly critical public letter in which he warned that the development was liable "to arouse doubts about the ability of the three Allied Powers to react and their determination" and he called the situation "a state of accomplished extortion".
Legislation was introduced in 1970 which ensured continued payment of wages for workers disabled by illness.
A women's policy machinery at the national level was established in 1972 while amnesty was guaranteed in minor offences connected with demonstrations.
In September 1971, an ordinance was published concerning dangerous working materials; safeguarding persons using these materials against the dangers involved.
"People were seized by a completely new feeling about life.
As mayor of West Berlin, Brandt accomplished much in the way of urban development.
Brandt was also known for his fierce anti-communist policies at the domestic level, culminating in the Radikalenerlass (Anti-Radical Decree) in 1972.
Taking into account the enormous high peaks of air traffic noise and its concentration at a limited number of airports, the Law for Protection against Aircraft Noise of 1971 sought to balance two conflicting demands, the first being the legitimate demand by industry, business and the public for an efficient air-traffic-system, and secondly, the understandable and by no means less legitimate claims of the affected people for protection and compensation.
Adjusted for changes in the annual price index, pensions went up in real terms by 3.1% (1970), 0.3% (1971), 3.9% (1972), 4.4% (1973), and 4.2% (1974).
Willy Brandt also has an unusual memorial in Hammersmith in London, United Kingdom.
However, in early 1983, a dispute arose about what Carlsson perceived as the SI president's authoritarian approach.
A council for urban development was formed in May 1972 with the purpose of promoting future work and measures in the field of urban renovation.
Brandt resigned as chancellor in 1974, after Günter Guillaume, one of his closest aides, was exposed as an agent of the Stasi, the East German secret service.
Kiesinger considered them to be "a shameful crowd of long-haired drop-outs who needed a bath and someone to discipline them".
His father was an accountant from Hamburg named John Möller, whom Brandt never met.
The law also introduced special subsidies to reduce the debt burden for builders not surpassing the regular income-limit by more than 40%.
In education, the Brandt Administration sought to widen educational opportunities for all West Germans.
Federal grants were increased, especially for the Cancer Research Centre in Heidelberg, while a Federal Institute for Sport Science was set up, together with the Institute for Social Medicine and Epidemiology in Berlin.
The school leaving age was raised to 16, and spending on research and education was increased by nearly 300% between 1970 and 1974.
Under this legislation, notice was to be ruled illegal "where appropriate substitute accommodation not available; landlords obliged to specify reasons for notice," whilst the Eviction Protection Law (1971) established tenant protection against rent rises and notice.
Next, against some vocal opposition, Brandt decided to move the next Socialist International Congress from Sydney, Australia to Portugal.
In 1971, rules were introduced making it possible for former guestworkers “to receive an unlimited residence permit after a five-year stay.”
Bahro and his supporters were attacked by the East German state security organization Stasi, headed by Erich Mielke, for his writings, which had laid the theoretical foundation of a leftist opposition to the ruling SED party and its dependent allies, and which promoted new and changed parties.
Brandt was the SPD candidate for the chancellorship in 1961, but he lost to Konrad Adenauer's conservative Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU).
On 23 April 1972, Wilhelm Helms (FDP) left the coalition ; the FDP politicians Knud von Kühlmann-Stumm and Gerhard Kienbaum also declared that they would vote against Brandt; thus, Brandt had lost his majority.
However, the Austrian Prime Minister, Bruno Kreisky, argued on behalf of Brandt: "It is a question of whether it is better to be pure or to have greater numbers".
There was a wide public-opinion gap between Kiesinger and Brandt in the West German polls.
In 1977, Brandt was appointed as the chairman of the Independent Commission for International Developmental Issues.
From 1972 to 1973, the total amount of individual aids granted by Guarantee Fund for the integration of young immigrants increased from 17 million DM to 26 million DM.
Though Brandt remained chancellor, he had lost his majority.
In 1972, an Act on Agency Work was passed which sought to prevent works agencies from providing job placement services and aimed to provide job minimum protection for employees in agency work.
In addition, efforts were made to improve the railways and motorways.
They had a daughter, Ninja Brandt (born in 1940).
Free preliminary investigations were introduced for 2.5 million children up until the age of 4 for the early detection and correction of developmental disorders, and health research was expanded.
Carlsson then rebuked Brandt saying: "this is a Socialist International — not a German International".
His mother was Martha Frahm, a single parent, who worked as a cashier for a department store.
In addition, a law for the creation of property for workers was passed, under which a married worker would normally keep up to 95% of his pay, and graded tax remission for married wage-earners applied up to a wage of 48,000 marks, which indicated the economic prosperity of West Germany at that time.
In the field of housing, various measures were carried out to benefit householders, such as in improving the rights of tenants and increasing rental assistance.
Brandt resigned from his position as chancellor on 6 May 1974, but he remained member of the Bundestag and chairman of the Social Democrats through 1987.
In July 1973, the 3rd Amendment to the Civilian Service Act came into force; “a prerequisite for the creation of additional civilian service places for recognized conscientious objectors.” The amendment provided that men recognized as conscientious objectors while performing military service should immediately be transferred to a civilian service assignment.
For those in the armed forces, the Federal Cost of Moving Act increased the relocation allowance (with effect from the 1st of November 1973), with the basic allowances raised by DM 50 and DM 100 respectively, while extra allowances for families were raised to a uniform amount of 125 DM.
A law on individual promotion of vocational training came into force in October 1971, which provided for financial grants for attendance at further general or technical teaching establishments from the second year of studies at higher technical schools, academies and higher education establishments, training centres of second degree, or certain courses of television teaching.
Brandt was in Germany from September to December 1936, disguised as a Norwegian student named '''Gunnar Gaasland'''.
In August 1971, a law came into force directed at reducing atmospheric pollution from lead compounds in four-stroke engine fuels.
Hansen and Brandt had three sons:  (born in 1948),  (born in 1951) and  (born in 1961).
The income limit for compulsory sickness insurance was indexed to changes in the wage level (1970) and the right to medical cancer screening for 23.5 million people was introduced.
There was determined, by statutory regulation issued in February 1970, the category of persons most seriously disabled “to whom, with regard to maintenance aid, an increased demand (50% of the appropriate rate) is being conceded, and, within the scope of relief in special living conditions: a higher rate of nursing aid.” In 1971, the retirement age for miners was lowered to 50.
The Severely Disabled Persons Act of April 1974 obliged all employers with more than fifteen employees to ensure that 6% of their workforce consisted of people officially recognised as being severely handicapped.
In the government's first budget, sickness benefits were increased by 9.3%, pensions for war widows by 25%, pensions for the war wounded by 16%, and retirement pensions by 5%.
In 2009, the University of Erfurt renamed its graduate school of public administration as the Willy Brandt School of Public Policy.
Brandt was said to be more a dreamer than a manager and was personally haunted by depression.
The maximum amount for servicemen enlisting for at least 12 years was increased from DM 6,000 to DM 9,000, and from October 1971 onwards, long-term personnel were paid grants towards the cost ‘of attending educational institutes of the “second educational route" or participating in state-recognized general education courses provided by private correspondence schools and the “television college."'
A ministerial order of January 1970 extended protection in cases of partial unemployment to home workers, while an ordinance of August 1970 fixed the conditions of health necessary for service in the merchant navy.
In cases where the two parties could not agree on a social plan, the law provided for binding arbitration.
The Second Eviction Protection Law (1972) made the tenant protection introduced under the Eviction Protection Law of 1971 permanent.
These directives imposed certain requirements for space, hygiene, safety, and amenities in the accommodation offered by employers.
New rules were introduced regarding improvements in the law relating to rented property, and control of the rise in rents and protection against cancellation of leases also safeguarded the rights of migrant workers in the sphere of housing.
In 1970, the government included nonmedical psychotherapists and psychoanalysts in the national health insurance program.
A mania for large scale reforms spread like wildfire, affecting schools, universities, the administration, family legislation.
A number of liberal social reforms were instituted whilst the welfare state was significantly expanded (with total public spending on social programs nearly doubling between 1969 and 1975), with health, housing, and social welfare legislation bringing about welcome improvements, and by the end of the Brandt Chancellorship West Germany had one of the most advanced systems of welfare in the world.
From 1941 until 1948 Brandt was married to Anna Carlotta Thorkildsen (the daughter of a Norwegian father and a German-American mother).
The Brandt Report became a recognised measure for describing the general North-South divide in world economics and politics between an affluent North and a poor South.
In the field of health care, various measures were introduced to improve the quality and availability of health care provision.
In the field of transport, the Municipal Transportation Finance Law of 1971 established federal guidelines for subsidies to municipal governments, while the Federal Transport Plan of 1973 provided a framework for all transport, including public transport.
Brandt spoke Norwegian fluently, and retained a close relationship with Norway.
Beginning in 1987, Brandt stepped down to become the Honorary Chairman of the party.
The Benefit Improvement Law (1973) made entitlement to hospital care legally binding (entitlements already enjoyed in practice), abolished time limits for hospital care, introduced entitlement to household assistance under specific conditions, and also introduced entitlement to leave of absence from work and cash benefits in the event of a child's illness.
Brandt was active in creating a degree of rapprochement with East Germany, and also in improving relations with the Soviet Union, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and other Eastern Bloc (communist) countries.
Generous public stipends were introduced for students to cover their living costs, while West German universities were converted from elite schools into mass institutions.
Compared to their forebears, the "skeptical generation" was much more capricious, willing to embrace more extreme socialist ideology (such as Maoism), and public heroes (such as Ho Chi Minh, Fidel Castro, and Che Guevara), while living a looser and more promiscuous lifestyle.
Brandt was originally considered one of the leaders of the right wing of the SPD, and earned initial fame as Governing Mayor of West Berlin.
On the other hand, Brandt needed a while to get into contact with, and to earn credibility among, the "Ausserparlamentarische Opposition" (APO) ("the extra-parliamentary opposition").
In addition, a progressive anticartel law was passed.
Most deputies of SPD and FDP did not take part in the voting, as not voting had the same effect as voting for Brandt.
In late 1946, Brandt returned to Berlin, working for the Norwegian government.
As chancellor, he maintained West Germany's close alignment with the United States and focused on strengthening European integration in western Europe, while launching the new policy of ''Ostpolitik'' aimed at improving relations with Eastern Europe.
This speech made Brandt, as well as the Social Democratic Party, popular among most of the students and other young West German baby-boomers who dreamed of a country that would be more open and more colorful than the frugal and still somewhat-authoritarian Bundesrepublik that had been built after World War II.
Between 1970 and 1972, the “Landabgaberente” (land transfer pension) went up by 55%.
In 1937, during the Civil War, Brandt worked in Spain as a journalist.
After 32 years of marriage, Willy Brandt and Rut Hansen Brand divorced in 1980, and from the day that they were divorced they never saw each other again.
In 1969, Brandt gained a small majority by forming a coalition with the FDP.
Guaranteed minimum pension benefits for all West Germans were introduced, along with automatic pension increases for war widows (1970).
Grants were also made in certain cases for attendance at training centres located outside the Federal Republic.
Brandt became the Chairman of the SPD in 1964, a post that he retained until 1987, longer than any other party Chairman since its foundation by August Bebel.
Directives on the housing of foreign workers came into force in April 1971.
a third of the total cost of some 300 schemes.
The federal crime-fighting apparatus was also modernised, while a Foreign Tax Act was passed which limited the possibility of tax evasion.
As his mother worked six days a week, he was mainly brought up by his mother's stepfather, Ludwig Frahm, and his second wife, Dora.
However, there is scant evidence to corroborate this suspicion.
He left the SPD to join the more left wing Socialist Workers Party (SAP), which was allied to the POUM in Spain and the Independent Labour Party in Britain.
On 9 December 1983, Brandt married  (born in 1946).
To everyone's surprise, the motion failed: Barzel got only 247 votes out of 260 ballots; for an absolute majority, 249 votes would have been necessary.
A number of reforms were also carried out to the armed forces, as characterised by a reduction in basic military training from 18 to 15 months, a reorganisation of education and training, and personnel and procurement procedures.
Development measures were begun in 1972 with federal financial aid granted to the Lander for improvement measures relating to towns and villages, and in the 1972 budget, DM 50 million was earmarked, i.e.
Brandt secured the release of a large number of them, and on 9 November 1990, his airplane landed with 174 freed hostages on board at the Frankfurt Airport.
The level of income for compulsory sickness insurance was indexed to 75% of the respective assessment level for pension insurance, while voluntarily insured employees were granted a claim to an allowance towards their sickness insurance from their employer.
Grants were introduced for pupils from lower income groups to stay on at school, together with grants for those going into any kind of higher or further education.
In the autumn of 1970 Jürgen Wischnewski of the SPD declared, 'Every week more than three plans for reform come up for decision in cabinet and in the Assembly.'"
Improvements were also made in income and work conditions for home workers, accident insurance was extended to non-working adults, and the Border Zone Assistance Act (1971) increased levels of assistance to the declining zonal peripheral area.
Brandt was succeeded as the Chancellor of the Bundesrepublik by his fellow Social Democrat, Helmut Schmidt.
In 1973, a measure was introduced that facilitated the adoption of young children by reducing the minimum age for adoptive parents from 35 to 25.
Substantial increases were made in social security benefits such as injury and sickness benefits, pensions, unemployment benefits, housing allowances, basic subsistence aid allowances, and family allowances and living allowances.
He is trying to accept the real situation in Europe, which has lasted for 25 years, but he is also trying to bring about a new reality in his bold approach to the Soviet Union and the East Bloc."
Wolf stated after the reunification that the resignation of Brandt had never been intended, and that the planting and handling of Guillaume had been one of the largest mistakes of the East German secret services.
Willy Brandt lectured in Sweden on 1 December 1940 at Bommersvik College about problems experienced by the social democrats in Nazi Germany and the occupied countries at the start of the Second World War.
The policies of Nixon and Henry Kissinger, after some initial suspicion, amounted to co-opting Brandt's Ostpolitik.
The lamp now stands on the wall of Westcott Lodge, facing Furnival Gardens, with a commemorative plaque below it.
He was married to Gertrud Meyer from Lübeck in a marriage of convenience to protect her from deportation.
'''Willy Brandt''' (; born '''Herbert Ernst Karl Frahm'''; 18 December 1913 – 8 October 1992) was a German statesman and politician, who was leader of the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) from 1964 to 1987 and served as Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany from 1969 to 1974.
Employees who qualified as disabled and had worked for at least thirty-five years were extended a more generous retirement window, which ranged between the ages of 60 and 62.
He was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1971 for his efforts to strengthen cooperation in western Europe through the EEC and to achieve reconciliation between West Germany and the countries of Eastern Europe.
In addition, funding for new rehabilitation facilities was increased.
In addition, there were no benefit reductions for employees who had decided to retire earlier than the age of 65.
The Second Housing Allowance Law of December 1970 simplified the administration of housing allowances and extended entitlements, increased the income limit to 9,600 DM per year plus 2,400 DM for each family member, raised the general deduction on income to determine reckonable income from 15% to 20%, allowance rates listed in tables replacing complicated calculation procedure based on "bearable rent burdens."
New hotels, office-blocks and flats were constructed, while both Schloss Charlottenburg and the Reichstag building were restored.
A year later, the Federal Government (Bund), the Lander and the Federal Labour Office promoted the construction of dwellings for migrant workers.
Free hospital care was introduced for 9 million recipients of social relief, while a contributory medical service for 23 million panel patients was introduced.
That same year, a special regulation came into force for District Master Chimney Sweeps, making them fully insurable under the Craftsman's Insurance Scheme.
In addition, according to a 1971 regulation of the Board of the Federal Labour Office, “construction of workers’ hostels qualified for government financial support under certain conditions.” The "German Council for town development", which was set up by virtue of Article 89 of a law to foster urban building, was partly aimed at planning a favourable environment for families (such as the provision of playgrounds).
The spirit of reformist optimism was cut short by the 1973 oil crisis and the major public services strike 1974, which gave Germany's trade unions, led by Heinz Kluncker, a big wage increase but reduced Brandt's financial leeway for further reforms.
Erhard's government was short-lived, however, and in 1966 a grand coalition between the SPD and CDU was formed, with Brandt as Foreign Minister and as the 5th Vice-Chancellor of Germany.
Brandt, having fought the Nazis and having faced down communist Eastern Germany during several crises while he was the mayor of Berlin, became a controversial, but credible, figure in several different factions.
Legislation aimed at safeguarding consumers was also implemented under the Brandt Administration.
The Bausparkassen Act of 1972 placed all Bausparkassen (from January 1974 onwards) under the supervision of the Federal Banking Supervisory Office, and confined Bausparkassen “to the contract saving business and related activities.” The Animal Protection Act, passed in 1972, introduced various safeguards for animals such as not permitting the causing of pain, injury, or suffering to an animal without justification, and limiting experiments to the minimum number of animals necessary.
