Burroughs spent 13 days in jail before his brother came to Mexico City and bribed Mexican lawyers and officials to release Burroughs on bail while he awaited trial for the killing, which was ruled culpable homicide.
Without heroin and suffering from Benzedrine abuse, Burroughs began to pursue other men as his libido returned, while Vollmer, feeling abandoned, started to drink heavily and mock Burroughs openly.
So he decides to shoot up heroin and he takes out this utility belt full of syringes.
Burroughs was a primary figure of the Beat Generation and a major postmodernist author who wrote in the paranoid fiction genre, and his influence is considered to have affected a range of popular culture as well as literature.
He went to Paris to meet Ginsberg and talk with Olympia Press.
Compared to Tangier, Ruark wrote, "Sodom was a church picnic and Gomorrah a convention of Girl Scouts."
When two of his friends from St. Louis, Lucien Carr, a University of Chicago student, and David Kammerer, Carr's admirer, left for New York City, Burroughs followed.
First published in 1982, the British slipstream fiction magazine ''Interzone'' (which later evolved into a more traditional science fiction magazine) paid tribute to him with its choice of name.
The building fell within New York City rent control policies that made it extremely cheap; it was only about four hundred dollars a month until 1981 when the rent control rules changed, doubling the rent overnight.
He attended the induction ceremony in May 1983.
Burroughs and Kerouac got into trouble with the law for failing to report a murder involving Lucien Carr, who had killed David Kammerer in a confrontation over Kammerer's incessant and unwanted advances.
Always a contradictory figure, Burroughs nevertheless criticized Anatole Broyard for reading authorial intent into his works where there is none, which sets him at odds both with New Criticism and the old school as represented by Mathew Arnold.
In 1949 he enrolled in Mexico City College under the GI Bill, which paid for his tuition and books and provided him with a seventy-five dollar per month stipend.
Burroughs and R.E.M.
There, he met Ilse Klapper, a Jewish woman fleeing the country's Nazi government.
A few months after his death, a collection of writings spanning his entire career, ''Word Virus'', was published (according to the book's introduction, Burroughs himself approved its contents prior to his death).
His grandfather, William Seward Burroughs I, founded the Burroughs Adding Machine company, which evolved into the Burroughs Corporation.
Burroughs narrated part of the 1980 documentary ''Shamans of the Blind Country'' by anthropologist and filmmaker Michael Oppitz.
In 1990, he released the spoken word album ''Dead City Radio,'' with musical back-up from producers Hal Willner and Nelson Lyon, and alternative rock band Sonic Youth.
In 1944, Burroughs began living with Joan Vollmer Adams in an apartment they shared with Jack Kerouac and Edie Parker, Kerouac's first wife.
Once again, the man faced criminal charges, this time in Paris for conspiracy to import opiates, when the Moroccan authorities forwarded their investigation to French officials.
But Allen Ginsberg worked to get excerpts published in ''Black Mountain Review'' and ''Chicago Review'' in 1958.
The film is perhaps the definitive account of Burroughs's life and Brookner and Burroughs maintained a very close collaboration during the shooting process.
In 1950, Robert Ruark had described the unbridled tenor of the Moroccan city in his syndicated column.
After leaving Mexico, Burroughs drifted through South America for several months, seeking out a drug called yagé, which promised to give the user telepathic abilities.
Vollmer's daughter, Julie Adams, went to live with her grandmother, and William S. Burroughs, Jr., went to St. Louis to live with his grandparents.
Although Burroughs would have episodes of being free from heroin, from this point until his death he was regularly addicted to the drug.
With some urging from Allen Ginsberg, and also perhaps Kerouac, Burroughs became intellectually and emotionally linked with Vollmer and by the summer of 1945 had moved in with Vollmer and her daughter.
The family moved briefly to New Orleans in 1948.
The "Word Hoard", the collection of manuscripts that produced ''Naked Lunch'', also produced parts of the later works ''The Soft Machine'' (1961), ''The Ticket That Exploded'' (1962), and ''Nova Express'' (1964).
He maintained, “I always say, keep your snout in the public trough.”
Excerpts from ''Naked Lunch'' were first published in the United States in 1958.
He claims he went through the most excruciating two months of opiate withdrawal while seeing his son through his trial and sentencing, traveling with Billy to Lexington, Kentucky from Miami to ensure his son entered the hospital he once spent time in as a volunteer admission.
Dent's apomorphine cure was also used to treat alcoholism, although it was held by several people who undertook it to be no more than straightforward aversion therapy.
His subsequent critical writings about the church and his review of ''Inside Scientology'' by Robert Kaufman led to a battle of letters between Burroughs and Scientology supporters in the pages of ''Rolling Stone'' magazine.
In Tangier, the ubiquitously veiled and shrouded woman loudly broadcast the subservient female role.
To Burroughs, all signs directed a return to Tangier, a city where drugs were freely available and where financial support from his family would continue.
He left home in 1932 to attend Harvard University, studied English, and anthropology as a postgraduate, and later attended medical school in Vienna.
When it was published in this authentically random manner, Burroughs liked it better than the initial plan.
Huge, old-fashioned ones from the '50s or something.
As a boy, Burroughs lived on Pershing Ave. in St. Louis's Central West End.
These splattered and shot panels and canvasses were first exhibited in the Tony Shafrazi Gallery in New York City in 1987.
Following his first cure, he wrote a detailed appreciation of apomorphine and other cures, which he submitted to ''The British Journal of Addiction'' (Vol.
Burroughs decided to relocate back to the United States permanently in 1976.
His father spent many months in 1976 and 1977 in Colorado, helping Billy through many additional surgeries and complications.
Burroughs continues to be named as an influence by contemporary writers of fiction.
During Burroughs's friendship and artistic collaborations with Brion Gysin and Ian Sommerville, the technique was combined with images, Gysin's paintings, and sound, via Somerville's tape recorders.
It was produced by Hal Willner and Nelson Lyon, with musical accompaniment from John Cale, Donald Fagen, Lenny Pickett, Chris Stein, Sonic Youth, and others.
Because of her addiction and social circle, her husband immediately divorced her after returning from the war.
He left for Tangier in November 1954 and spent the next four years there working on the fiction that would later become ''Naked Lunch'', as well as attempting to write commercial articles about Tangier.
Now, I have no idea how an 80 year old guy finds a vein, but he knew what he was doing.
Edited by Oliver Harris, the book contains transcriptions of journal entries made by Burroughs during the time of composing ''Queer'' and ''The Yage Letters''., with cover art and review information.
'', Burroughs described it as "not a very distinguished work".
Burroughs appears near the end of U2's music video "Last Night on Earth", pushing a shopping cart with a large spotlight positioned inside it.
Meanwhile, Vollmer's addiction led to a temporary psychosis which resulted in her admission to  Bellevue Hospital, which endangered the custody of her child.
Grauerholz had managed several rock bands in Kansas and took the lead in booking for Burroughs reading tours that would help support him throughout the next two decades.
Burroughs planned to stay in Mexico for at least five years, the length of his charge's statute of limitations.
I said 'Wow, do you have any idea how big this is!?'
Ace Books published the novel in 1953 as part of an Ace Double under the pen name William Lee, retitling it ''Junkie: Confessions of an Unredeemed Drug Addict'' (it was later republished as ''Junkie'', then in 1977 as ''Junky'', and finally in 2003 as ''Junky: the definitive text of &apos;Junk,&apos;'' edited by Oliver Harris').
With Brion Gysin, he also popularized the literary cut-up technique in works such as The Nova Trilogy (1961–1964).
You were giving out all this energy and nothing was coming back."
The 25th anniversary edition of ''Queer'' published in 2010, edited by Oliver Harris, called into question Burroughs's claim, and clarified the importance for ''Queer'' of Burroughs's traumatic relationship with the boyfriend fictionalised in the story as Eugene Allerton, rather than the shooting of Vollmer.
Burroughs's parents sold the rights to his grandfather's invention and had no share in the Burroughs Corporation.
In the 1960s, Burroughs joined and then left the Church of Scientology.
The novel was initially rejected by City Lights Books, the publisher of Ginsberg's ''Howl''; and Olympia Press publisher Maurice Girodias, who had published English-language novels in France that were controversial for their subjective views of sex and anti-social characters.
53, 1956) under the title "Letter From A Master Addict To Dangerous Drugs"; this letter is appended to many editions of ''Naked Lunch''.
I said 'Hey, this looks important.'
In 1990, Island Records released ''Dead City Radio'', a collection of readings set to a broad range of musical compositions.
'', "The "Priest" They Called Him".
Some  say that he was expelled from Los Alamos after taking chloral hydrate in Santa Fe with a fellow student.
Burroughs was in New York when he heard from Allen Ginsberg of Billy's death.
Lawrence Ferlinghetti remarked the induction of Burroughs into the Academy proved Herbert Marcuse's point that capitalistic society had a great ability to incorporate its one-time outsiders.
Wilson would recount in his ''Cosmic Trigger II: Down to Earth'' having interviewed both Burroughs and Ginsberg for ''Playboy'' the day the riots began, as well as his experiences with Shea during the riots, providing some detail on the creation of the fictional sequence.
He then attended the Los Alamos Ranch School in New Mexico, which was stressful for him.
Finding success with his confessional first novel, ''Junkie'' (1953), Burroughs is perhaps best known for his third novel ''Naked Lunch'' (1959), a highly controversial work that underwent a court case under the U.S. sodomy laws.
Once, Stern scared Burroughs so much, he asked to be let out of the vehicle.
Upon Burroughs's attorney fleeing Mexico in light of his own legal problems involving a car accident and altercation with the son of a government official, Burroughs decided, according to Ted Morgan, to "skip" and return to the United States.
Others consider his concepts and attitude more influential than his prose.
In 1943 while living in New York City, he befriended Allen Ginsberg and Jack Kerouac, the mutually influential foundation of which grew into the Beat Generation, which was later a defining influence on the 1960s counterculture.
In 1992 Burroughs worked with The Disposable Heroes of Hiphoprisy on ''Spare Ass Annie and Other Tales'', with the duo providing musical background and accompaniment to Burroughs's spoken readings from several of his books.
I am forced to the appalling conclusion that I would never have become a writer but for Joan's death, and to a realization of the extent to which this event has motivated and formulated my writing.
Splatterpunk writer Poppy Z. Brite has frequently referenced this aspect of Burroughs's work.
Burroughs was portrayed by Kiefer Sutherland in the 2000 film ''Beat'', written and directed by Gary Walkow.
It was Grauerholz who floated the idea of reading tours, something similar to rock and roll touring, or stand-up comedian dates in clubs across the country.
They returned to St. Louis to visit Burroughs's parents and then moved with her daughter to Texas.
Cooper, in return, wrote, in his essay 'King Junk', "along with Jean Genet, John Rechy, and Ginsberg, Burroughs helped make homosexuality seem cool and highbrow, providing gay liberation with a delicious edge".
In 1990, Burroughs was honored with a star on the St. Louis Walk of Fame.
Shortly before the 1929 stock market crash, they sold their stock for $200,000 (equivalent to approximately $ in today's funds).
He traveled to Europe and became involved in Austrian and Hungarian Weimar-era LGBT culture; he picked up young men in steam baths in Vienna, and moved in a circle of exiles, homosexuals, and runaways.
Earlier Burroughs revisited St. Louis, Missouri, taking a large advance from ''Playboy'' to write an article about his trip back to St. Louis, one that was eventually published in ''The Paris Review'', after Burroughs refused to alter the style for ''Playboy''&apos;s publishers.
In December 2007, Ohio State University Press released ''Everything Lost: The Latin American Journals of William S. Burroughs''.
He visited lesbian dives, piano bars, and the Harlem and Greenwich Village homosexual underground with Richard Stern, a wealthy friend from Kansas City.
The track on the 13th Ministry album "Thanx but No Thanx" makes use of William S. Burroughs's poem "A Thanksgiving Prayer", as read by Sgt.
The only newspaper columnist Burroughs admired was the right-wing opinion shaper for the William Randolph Hearst newspaper chain, Westbrook Pegler.
The diagnosis was liver cirrhosis so complete that the only treatment was a rarely performed liver transplant operation.
His mother recognized her son's depression and got Burroughs a civilian disability discharge&nbsp;— a release from duty based on the premise he should have not been allowed to enlist due to previous mental instability.
They would drive from Boston to New York in a reckless fashion.
Prominent admirers of Burroughs's work have included British critic and biographer Peter Ackroyd, the rock critic Lester Bangs, the philosopher Gilles Deleuze and the authors J. G. Ballard, Angela Carter, Jean Genet, William Gibson, Alan Moore, Kathy Acker and Ken Kesey.
Nevertheless, the trial was continuously delayed and Burroughs began to write what would eventually become the short novel ''Queer'' while awaiting his trial.
''Naked Lunch'' was featured in a 1959 ''Life'' magazine cover story, partly as an article that highlighted the growing Beat literary movement.
Vollmer also became an addict, but her drug of choice was Benzedrine, an amphetamine sold over the counter at that time.
Although he needed income desperately, he turned down a teaching position at the University at Buffalo for $15,000 a semester.
And I can get out in the country and fish and shoot and whatnot."
His abhorrence of the government did not prevent Burroughs from using its programs to his own advantage.
His maternal uncle, Ivy Lee, was an advertising pioneer later employed as a publicist for the Rockefellers.
In 1984, he signed a seven-book deal with Viking Press after he signed with literary agent Andrew Wylie.
He spent time with his parents in Palm Beach, Florida, and New York City with Allen Ginsberg.
He was interred in the family plot in Bellefontaine Cemetery in St. Louis, Missouri, with a marker bearing his full name and the epitaph "American Writer".
He died shortly afterwards.
He had cut off contact with his father several years before, even publishing an article in ''Esquire'' magazine claiming the author had poisoned his life and revealing that he had been molested by one of his father's friends as a fourteen-year-old while visiting his father in Tangier, something that he had previously kept to himself.
According to Ted Morgan's ''Literary Outlaw'',
In 1983, Burroughs was elected to the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters, and in 1984 was awarded the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by France.
The album was reissued in 1997 with 3 bonus remixes.
New York critic John Ciardi did manage to get a copy and wrote a positive review of the work, prompting a telegram from Allen Ginsberg praising the review.
In talking about the experience, he claimed that the techniques and philosophy of Scientology helped him and that he felt that further study into Scientology would produce great results.
Burroughs also attended classes at the Mexico City College in 1950 studying Spanish, as well as "Mexican picture writing" (codices) and the Mayan language with R. H. Barlow.
In a short essay entitled "A Review of the Reviewers", Burroughs answers his critics in this way:
Burroughs accidentally killed his second wife, Joan Vollmer, in 1951 in Mexico City, and was consequently convicted of manslaughter.
Burroughs's work has since been featured in over 50 international galleries and museums including Royal Academy of the Arts, Centre Pompidou, Guggenheim Museum, ZKM Karlsruhe, Sammlung Falckenberg, New Museum, Irish Museum of Modern Art, Los Angeles County Museum, and Whitney Museum of American Art.
What do you remember of us?"
One night while drinking with friends at a party above the American-owned Bounty Bar in Mexico City, a drunk Burroughs allegedly took his handgun from his travel bag and told his wife "It's time for our William Tell act", even though they had never performed such an act previously.
'''William Seward Burroughs II''' ( ; also known by his pen name '''William Lee'''; February 5, 1914&nbsp;– August 2, 1997) was an American novelist, short story writer, satirist, essayist, painter, and spoken word performer.
I live with the constant threat of possession, and a constant need to escape from possession, from control.
Burroughs is featured on the 2000 compilation tribute album, ''Stoned Immaculate'', on a track that pairs Jim Morrison yelping and groaning with Burroughs reading Morrison's poetry.
These novels feature extensive use of the cut-up technique which influenced all of Burroughs's subsequent fiction to a degree.
The school was a boarding school for the wealthy, "where the spindly sons of the rich could be transformed into manly specimens".
In the 2013 ensemble biopic ''Kill Your Darlings'' Burroughs is played by Ben Foster.
The allowance was a ticket to freedom; it allowed him to live where he wanted to and to forgo employment.
Years later, in the documentary ''What Happened to Kerouac?
As part of his release, Burroughs returned to St. Louis under his parents' care, after which he left for Mexico to get a divorce from Illse Klapper.
He also appears briefly at the beginning of Van Sant's ''Even Cowgirls Get the Blues'' (based on the Tom Robbins novel), in which he is seen crossing a city street; as the noise of the city rises around him he pauses in the middle of the intersection and speaks the single word "ominous".
He was skeptical of the organization itself, and felt that it fostered an environment that did not accept critical discussion.
In this sense, the cut-up method may be considered as analogous to the collage method in the visual arts.
Reviews were mixed for ''Cities''.
Van Sant's short film "Thanksgiving Prayer" features Burroughs reading the poem "Thanksgiving Day, Nov. 28, 1986", from ''Tornado Alley'', intercut with a collage of black and white images.
Vollmer Adams was married to a G.I.
Also from ''Naked Lunch'' came the names Clarknova, The Mugwumps and The Insect Trust.
Under his constant drinking, there were long periods where Billy was out of contact with any of his family or friends.
In 1972, Burroughs and Southern unsuccessfully attempted to adapt ''Naked Lunch'' for the screen in conjunction with American game-show producer Chuck Barris.
Eventually, Ginsberg and Kerouac, who had traveled to Tangier in 1957, helped Burroughs type, edit, and arrange these episodes into ''Naked Lunch''.
In 1968, an abbreviated—77 minutes as opposed to the original's 104 minutes—version of Benjamin Christensen's 1922 film ''Häxan'' was released, subtitled ''Witchcraft Through The Ages''.
and he replies 'Nah, it's probably just junk mail.'
Burroughs is often called one of the greatest and most influential writers of the 20th century, most notably by Norman Mailer whose quote on Burroughs, "The only American novelist living today who may conceivably be possessed by genius", appears on many Burroughs publications.
Burroughs recites the lyrics of R.E.M.
After leaving Harvard, Burroughs's formal education ended, except for brief flirtations as a graduate student of anthropology at Columbia and as a medical student in Vienna, Austria.
After returning to the United States, he held a string of uninteresting jobs.
His was a prominent family of English ancestry in St. Louis, Missouri.
This deal included the publication rights to the unpublished 1952 novel ''Queer''.
Five books have been published of his interviews and correspondences.
The back-and-forth sway of the read replicated the theme of the trilogy; time-travel adventures where Burroughs's narrators rewrite episodes in history and thus reform mankind.
The two would cultivate a long-term friendship that revolved around a mutual interest in artworks and cut-up techniques.
He became a well known homosexual writer after the publication of ''Naked Lunch'' in 1959.
Their marriage was never formalized, but she lived as his common-law wife.
Burroughs was cited by Robert Anton Wilson as the first person to notice the "23 Enigma":
Thin White Rope took their name from Burroughs's euphemism for ejaculation.
Grauerholz helped edit ''Cities'' when it was first rejected by Burroughs's long-time editor Dick Seaver at Holt Rinehart, after it was deemed too disjointed.
He lost his virginity in an East St. Louis, Illinois brothel that summer with a female prostitute he regularly patronized.
Who's president nowadays?'
In the 2004 novel ''Move Under Ground'', Burroughs, Kerouac, and Neal Cassady team up to defeat Cthulhu.
Jack Sargeant's book ''Naked Lens: Beat Cinema'' details Burroughs film work at length, covering his collaborations with Balch and Burroughs's theories of film.
The music was recorded by the surviving Doors members in 2000 specifically for this album.
An excerpt of this work, in which Burroughs and Kerouac wrote alternating chapters, was finally published in ''Word Virus'', a compendium of William Burroughs's writing that was published by his biographer after his death in 1997.
In 1968 Burroughs joined Jean Genet, John Sack, and Terry Southern in covering the 1968 Democratic National Convention for ''Esquire'' magazine.
Vollmer soon became pregnant with Burroughs's child.
Aside from numerous previously released pieces, ''Word Virus'' also included what was promoted as one of the few surviving fragments of ''And the Hippos Were Boiled in Their Tanks'', a then-unpublished novel by Burroughs and Kerouac (ultimately, however, the complete work would be published in 2008).
His savior was the newly arrived, twenty-one-year-old book seller and Beat Generation devotee James Grauerholz, who worked for Burroughs part-time as a secretary as well as in a book store.
In 1992 he recorded "Quick Fix" with Ministry, which appeared on their single for "Just One Fix".
Burroughs fled to Mexico to escape possible detention in Louisiana's Angola state prison.
A book composed of letters between Burroughs and Ginsberg, ''The Yage Letters,'' was published in 1963 by City Lights Books.
Novelist and critic Anthony Burgess panned the work in ''Saturday Review'', saying Burroughs was boring readers with repetitive episodes of pederast fantasy and sexual strangulation that lacked any comprehensible world view or theology; other reviewers, like J. G. Ballard, argued that Burroughs was shaping a new literary "mythography".
Ted Morgan's biography asserts that their relationship was not spontaneous and lacked real warmth or intimacy.
Bill Laswell's Material collaborated with Burroughs to produce the 1989 album ''Seven Souls'', wherein Burroughs recites passages from his book ''The Western Lands'' to musical accompaniment.
In 1939, his mental health became a concern for his parents, especially after he deliberately severed the last joint of his left little finger, right at the knuckle, to impress a man with whom he was infatuated.
He also collaborated with Tom Waits and director Robert Wilson to create ''The Black Rider'', a play which opened at the Thalia Theatre in Hamburg in 1990, to critical acclaim, and was later performed all over Europe and the U.S.
Financed by a reclusive acquaintance of Burroughs, the project lost traction after financial problems and creative disagreements between Hopper and Burroughs.
He inspired 1970s proto-punk rock band Doctors of Madness.
The American extreme metal band Success Will Write Apocalypse Across the Sky took their name from the 1989 text "Apocalypse", in which Burroughs describes "art and creative expression taking a literal and physical form".
In addition, restored editions of numerous texts have been published in recent years, all containing additional material and essays on the works.
Organized by Columbia professor Sylvère Lotringer, Giorno, and Grauerholz, the Nova Convention was a multimedia retrospective of Burroughs's work held from November 30 to December 2, 1978, at various locations throughout New York.
His parents, upon his graduation, had decided to give him a monthly allowance of $200 out of their earnings from Cobblestone Gardens, a tidy sum in those days.
Vollmer and their children followed him.
The two fledgling authors were unable to get it published, but the manuscript was eventually published in November 2008 by Grove Press and Penguin Books.
Burroughs reported every Monday morning to the jail in Mexico City while his prominent Mexican attorney worked to resolve the case.
Burroughs is portrayed by Ben Foster in the 2013 film ''Kill Your Darlings'', directed by John Krokidas and written by John Krokidas and Austin Bunn.
He attended John Burroughs School in St. Louis where his first published essay, "Personal Magnetism", was printed in the ''John Burroughs Review'' in 1929.
In an introduction to ''Last Words: The Final Journals of William S. Burroughs'', James Grauerholz (who managed Burroughs's reading tours in the 1980s and 1990s) mentions that part of his job was to deal with the "underworld" in each city to secure the author's needed drugs.
He also collaborated on projects and recordings with numerous performers and musicians, and made many appearances in films.
Both the New Wave and, especially, the cyberpunk schools of science fiction are indebted to him.
Throughout early 1977, Burroughs collaborated with Southern and Dennis Hopper on a screen adaptation of ''Junky''.
It raised his public profile, eventually aiding in his obtaining new publishing contracts.
Burroughs was so dedicated to the cut-up method that he often defended his use of the technique before editors and publishers, most notably Dick Seaver at Grove Press in the 1960s and Holt, Rinehart & Winston in the 1980s.
Burroughs also made an appearance in the video for "Just One Fix".
The film features interviews with many of Burroughs's friends and collaborators including Allen Ginsberg, Brion Gysin, Francis Bacon, Herbert Huncke, Patti Smith and Terry Southern.
In 1942 Burroughs enlisted in the U.S. Army to serve during World War II, but was turned down by the Office of Strategic Services and Navy, after which he picked up the drug addiction that affected him for the rest of his life, while working a variety of jobs.
can you still love your mortal acquaintances?
Publication of a memoir by Burroughs entitled ''Evil River'' by Viking Press has been delayed several times; after initially being announced for a 2005 release, Web retailers such as indicated a 2007 release, complete with an ISBN number (ISBN 0670813516), but no such release has, to date, occurred.
Louis Post-Dispatch'', covering the police docket.
"The teaching gig was a lesson in never again.
J. G. Ballard considered Burroughs to be "the most important writer to emerge since the Second World War", while Norman Mailer declared him "the only American writer who may be conceivably possessed by genius".
During 1953, Burroughs was at loose ends.
