The school was set up as an episcopal foundation to spread the ideas of the Anglican Church in Scotland, and to educate the sons of the gentry.
Gladstone wanted to maintain a balance between direct and indirect taxation and to abolish income tax.
Some historians argue that the invasion was to protect the Suez Canal and to prevent anarchy in the wake of the Urabi Revolt and the riots in Alexandria in June 1882.
Gladstone also opposed Chancellor Sir William Harcourt's proposal to implement a graduated death duty.
With reference to rumours which I believe were at one time afloat, though I know not with what degree of currency: and also with reference to the times when I shall not be here to answer for myself, I desire to record my solemn declaration and assurance, as in the sight of God and before His Judgment Seat, that at no period of my life have I been guilty of the act which is known as that of infidelity to the marriage bed.
In November 1874, he published the pamphlet ''The Vatican Decrees in their Bearing on Civil Allegiance'', directed at the First Vatican Council's dogmatising Papal Infallibility in 1870, which had outraged him.
Looking back in 1883, Gladstone wrote that "In principle, perhaps my Coalwhippers Act of 1843 was the most Socialistic measure of the last half century".
Gladstone's first premiership instituted reforms in the British Army, civil service, and local government to cut restrictions on individual advancement.
The general election of 1892 resulted in a minority Liberal government with Gladstone as Prime Minister.
for incomes above £100.
In 1860 Gladstone intended to abolish the duty on paper – a controversial policy, because the duty traditionally inflated the cost of publishing and hindered the dissemination of radical working-class ideas.
Whenever the Liberals were out of power, home rule proposals languished.
But he was far and away the best Parliamentary speaker I have ever heard.
No money bill had been rejected by Lords for over 200 years, and a furore arose over this vote.
the receivers & guardians of savings.
The threats caused him to declare: "I shall prove and demonstrate to the world that the Qur'an is an undying, inextinguishable Sun!"
We are closely & warmly agreed".
Gladstone is consistently ranked as one of Britain's greatest Prime Ministers.
After the 1880 election, he formed his second ministry, which saw crises in Egypt (culminating in the death of General Gordon in 1885), and in Ireland, where the government passed repressive measures but also improved the legal rights of Irish tenant farmers.
The only means which have been placed in my power of 'raising the wages of colliers' has been by endeavouring to beat down all those restrictions upon trade which tend to reduce the price to be obtained for the product of their labour, & to lower as much as may be the taxes on the commodities which they may require for use or for consumption.
Gladstone met Queen Victoria, and she shook hands with him for (to his recollection) the first time in the fifty years he had known her.
First was the minimisation of public expenditure on the premise that the economy and society were best helped by allowing people to spend as they saw fit.
Under this proposal, on 5 April 1860, the income-tax will by law expire.
Gladstone...viz., the late Richard Cobden".
The working-class newspapers were so taken by surprise they had little time to express an opinion on Gladstone's manifesto before the election was over.
He found contemporary Liberalism better, "but far from being good".
We propose, then, to re-enact it for two years, from April, 1853, to April, 1855, at the rate of 7d.
In 1868 the Irish Church Resolutions was proposed as a measure to reunite the Liberal Party in government (on the issue of disestablishment of the Church of Ireland&nbsp;– this would be done during Gladstone's First Government in 1869 and meant that Irish Roman Catholics did not need to pay their tithes to the Anglican Church of Ireland).
Gladstone gave evidence to the Committee: "I approached the subject in the first instance as I think everyone in Parliament of necessity did, with the strongest possible prejudice against the proposal to interfere; but the facts stated were of so extraordinary and deplorable a character, that it was impossible to withhold attention from them.
This is a fictionalised account and there is no evidence in Hansard to support that William Gladstone ever made these comments.
As a boy William was baptised into the Church of England.
On 24 March 1892 Gladstone said that the Liberals had:
Throughout the corn law crisis of 1846, therefore, Gladstone was in the highly anomalous and possibly unique position of being a secretary of state without a seat in either house and thus unanswerable to parliament."
It is the individual mind and conscience, it is the individual character, on which mainly human happiness or misery depends.
Gladstone died on 19 May 1898 at Hawarden Castle, Hawarden, aged 88.
The resulting split in the Liberal Party helped keep them out of office, with one short break, for twenty years.
There were many who disagreed with him.
Gladstone believed that government was extravagant and wasteful with taxpayers' money and so sought to let money "fructify in the pockets of the people" by keeping taxation levels down through "peace and retrenchment".
In a letter to Lord Acton on 11 February 1885, Gladstone criticised Tory Democracy as "demagogism" that "put down pacific, law-respecting, economic elements that ennobled the old Conservatism" but "still, in secret, as obstinately attached as ever to the evil principle of class interests".
In the second ministry of Robert Peel he served as President of the Board of Trade (1843–45).
Historian Sneh Mahajan has concluded  "Gladstone's second ministry remained barren of any achievement in the domestic sphere."
* The Rev.Stephen Edward Gladstone (1844–1920).
This seems to me to be a growing evil.
Gladstone stood for South West Lancashire and for Greenwich, it being quite common then for candidates to stand in two constituencies simultaneously.
Gladstone steadily reduced Income tax over the course of his tenure as Chancellor.
On 11 December 1891 Gladstone said that: "It is a lamentable fact if, in the midst of our civilisation, and at the close of the nineteenth century, the workhouse is all that can be offered to the industrious labourer at the end of a long and honourable life.
They were called up and relieved through public-houses and therefore a man could not get this job unless he possessed the favourable opinion of the publican, who looked upon most favourably those who drank.
in the £; from April, 1855, to enact it for two more years at 6d.
In a fragment of autobiography dated 25 July 1894, Gladstone denounced the tax as
It was early in the morning.
The peace is maintained by the ministry of Gladstone, and the delivery of destructive medium-range ballistic missiles for delivery of Anti-Ice weapons termed 'Gladstone Shells' set the scene for a First World War in 1914 of such ferocity as to resemble nuclear warfare three generations early.
* Mary Gladstone (1847–1927), later Mrs. Harry Drew.
In a "Declaration" signed on 7 December 1896 and only to be opened after his death by his son Stephen, Gladstone wrote:
Evelyn Ashley famously described the scene in the grounds of Hawarden Castle on 1 December 1868, though getting the date wrong:
The pamphlet sold 150,000 copies by the end of 1874.
All his Cabinet colleagues, however, believed in some expansion of the navy.
Gladstone resigned in March 1894, in opposition to increased naval expenditure.
* Agnes Gladstone (1842–1931), later Mrs. Edward Wickham.
In contrast to 1868 and 1880 when the Liberal campaign lasted several months, only three weeks separated the news of the dissolution and the election.
I said nothing, but waited while the well-directed blows resounded in regular cadence.
Gladstone's proposals went some way to meet working-class demands, such as the realisation of the free breakfast table through repealing duties on tea and sugar, and reform of local taxation which was increasing for the poorer ratepayers.
Due to his actions as Chancellor, Gladstone earned the reputation as the liberator of British trade and the working man's breakfast table, the man responsible for the emancipation of the popular press from "taxes upon knowledge" and for placing a duty on the succession of the estates of the rich.
The only sound, healthy description of countenancing and assisting these institutions is that which teaches independence and self-exertion".
Gladstone was increasingly uneasy about the direction in which British politics was moving.
Lord Kilbracken, one of Gladstone's secretaries added:
Let the Government labour to its utmost, let the Legislature labour days and nights in your service; but, after the very best has been attained and achieved, the question whether the English father is to be the father of a happy family and the centre of a united home is a question which must depend mainly upon himself.
Gladstone wrote to Herbert Spencer, who contributed the introduction to a collection of anti-socialist essays (''A Plea for Liberty'', 1891), that "I ask to make reserves, and of one passage, which will be easily guessed, I am unable even to perceive the relevancy.
On 11 July 1882, Gladstone ordered the bombardment of Alexandria, starting the Anglo-Egyptian War, which resulted in the occupation of Egypt.
The Liberals received a majority of the vote in each of the constituent countries of the United Kingdom and 189,000 more votes nationally than the Conservatives.
At a speech at Blackheath on 28 October 1871, he warned his constituents against these social reformers:
These pamphlets show the concerns of people from all strands of society and together form a historical resource of the social and economical conditions of mid to late nineteenth century Britain.
After the intervention of Sir Josiah Traveller and Ned Vickers in halting the Franco-Prussian War of 1871 with apocalyptic Anti-Ice weapons, a cold war settles over Europe in the late 19th century.
On 2 January 1897 he wrote to Francis Hirst on being unable to draft a preface to a book on liberalism: "I venture on assuring you that I regard the design formed by you and your friends with sincere interest, and in particular wish well to all the efforts you may make on behalf of individual freedom and independence as opposed to what is termed Collectivism".
In 1886 Gladstone's party allied with Irish Nationalists to defeat Lord Salisbury's government.
Gladstone published his first book, ''The State in its Relations with the Church'', in 1838, in which he argued that the goal of the state should be to promote and defend the interests of the Church of England.
William Gladstone's early attempts to find a wife proved unsuccessful, with his being rejected by Caroline Eliza Farquhar (daughter of Sir Thomas Harvie Farquhar, 2nd Baronet) in 1835, and by Lady Frances Harriet Douglas (daughter of George Douglas, 17th Earl of Morton) in 1837.
And the severity of the blow is greatly aggravated in moral effect by the fact that it is dealt only to a handful of individuals.
In 1838 Gladstone nearly ruined his career when he tried to force a religious mission upon the Conservative Party.
Gladstone supported the London dockers in their strike of 1889.
Gladstone's support for electoral reform and disestablishment of the Anglican Church in Ireland alienated him from constituents in his Oxford University seat, and he lost it in the 1865 general election.
Publicans issued employment solely on the capacity of the man to pay, and men often left the pub to work drunk.
All the people who pretend to take your own concerns out of your own hands and to do everything for you, I won't say they are imposters; I won't even say they are quacks; but I do say they are mistaken people.
... What I look to is the social good, the benefit to the relations of the two countries, and the effect on the peace of Europe".
Gladstone's second administration&nbsp;– both as Prime Minister and again as Chancellor of the Exchequer till 1882&nbsp;– lasted from June 1880 to June 1885.
He retained his seat in the Commons until 1895.
His last public statement was dictated to his daughter Helen in reply to receiving the Vice-Chancellor of the University of Oxford's "sorrow and affection": "There is no expression of Christian sympathy that I value more than that of the ancient University of Oxford, the God-fearing and God-sustaining University of Oxford.
And those who ... promise to the dwellers in towns that every one of them shall have a house and garden in free air, with ample space; those who tell you that there shall be markets for selling at wholesale prices retail quantities—I won't say are imposters, because I have no doubt they are sincere; but I will say they are quacks (cheers); they are deluded and beguiled by a spurious philanthropy, and when they ought to give you substantial, even if they are humble and modest boons, they are endeavouring, perhaps without their own consciousness, to delude you with fanaticism, and offering to you a fruit which, when you attempt to taste it, will prove to be but ashes in your mouths.
Gladstone won his constituency election in Midlothian and also in Leeds, where he had also been adopted as a candidate.
The Irish Nationalists held the balance of power in Parliament at this time.
In middle life he decided that the individual conscience would have to replace authority as the inner citadel of the Church.
and the higher incomes paid 13d.
You would not like to have a housekeeper or steward who made her or his popularity with the tradesmen the measure of the payments that were to be delivered to them.
In 1821 William followed in the footsteps of his older brothers and attended Eton College before matriculating in 1828 at Christ Church, Oxford, where he read Classics and Mathematics, although he had no great interest in mathematics.
During this administration he first introduced his Home Rule Bill for Ireland.
He rejected a call to enter the ministry, and on this his conscience always tormented him.
In 1859 he wrote to his brother, who was a member of the Financial Reform Association at Liverpool: "Economy is the first and great article (economy such as I understand it) in my financial creed.
He saw the war as "great dishonour" and also criticised British conduct in the Zulu War.
He aided the House of Mercy at Clewer near Windsor (which exercised extreme in-house discipline) and spent much time arranging employment for ex-prostitutes.
He resigned and handed over to foreign secretary, Lord Rosebery.
As he could lawfully only serve as MP for one constituency, Leeds was passed to his son Herbert.
for incomes above £150 and at 7d.
By May £6,870,000 was needed to finance the war and introducing another budget on 8 May, Gladstone raised income tax from tenpence halfpenny to fourteen pence in the pound to raise £3,250,000.
Alone he knelt in the presence of his God till the absolution has been spoken, and the sacred elements received.
Every afternoon the whole world is invited to assist at the crashing fall of some beech or elm or oak.
Gladstone wrote to Cobden: "... the great aim—the moral and political significance of the act, and its probable and desired fruit in binding the two countries together by interest and affection.
The following month he was appointed Under-Secretary of State for War and the Colonies, an office he held until the government's resignation in April 1835.
To finance these reductions in indirect taxation, the income tax, instead of being abolished, was raised to 10d.
It has raised Gladstone to a great political elevation, and, what is of far greater consequence than the measure itself, has given the country assurance of a man equal to great political necessities, and fit to lead parties and direct governments.
They represented everywhere government by force, as opposed to government by law.
Gladstone became concerned at the political situation in Naples and the arrest and imprisonment of Neapolitan liberals.
Undoubtedly I think that questions of this kind, whatever be the intention of the questioner, have a tendency to produce in the minds of people, or to suggest to the people, that these fluctuations can be corrected by the action of the Executive Government.
In the early months of 1897 Gladstone and his wife stayed in Cannes.
Gladstone riposted "It was enough to make Peel and Cobden turn in their graves".
At a dinner in November with Edward Hamilton, his former private secretary, Hamilton noted that "What is now uppermost in his mind is what he calls the spirit of jingoism under the name of Imperialism which is now so prevalent".
In my opinion the Chancellor of the Exchequer is the trusted and confidential steward of the public.
I am bound to say hardly ever in the six years that Sir Stafford Northcote has been in office have I heard him speak a resolute word on behalf of economy.
Gladstone claimed that this Liberalism's "pet idea is what they call construction,&nbsp;– that is to say, taking into the hands of the state the business of the individual man".
Usually not more than two-thirds of a tax imposed could be collected in a financial year so Gladstone therefore imposed the extra four pence at a rate of 8d.
Sir Robert Peel, Gladstone's chief, was outraged because this would upset the delicate political issue of Catholic Emancipation and anger the Nonconformists.
... by universal consent it was one of the grandest displays and most able financial statement that ever was heard in the House of Commons; a great scheme, boldly, skilfully, and honestly devised, disdaining popular clamour and pressure from without, and the execution of it absolute perfection.
Gladstone argued that the £100 line was "the dividing line ... between the educated and the labouring part of the community" and that therefore the income tax payers and the electorate were to be the same people, who would then vote to cut government expenditure.
He then resumed his task, and never said another word till the tree was down.
Back in office in early 1886, Gladstone proposed Irish home rule but this was defeated in the House of Commons in July.
On 8 January 1896, in conversation with L. A. Tollemache, Gladstone explained that: "I am not so much afraid of Democracy or of Science as of the love of money.
The novel ends on an ambiguous note, with the Gladstone Shell now a component of British diplomacy and deterrence of war between Prussia and France.
In January 1894 Gladstone wrote that he would not "break to pieces the continuous action of my political life, nor trample on the tradition received from every colleague who has ever been my teacher" by supporting naval rearmament.
His coffin was transported on the London Underground before his state funeral at Westminster Abbey, at which the Prince of Wales (the future Edward VII) and the Duke of York (the future George V) acted as pallbearers.
Gladstone criticised it as "a war more unjust in its origin, a war more calculated in its progress to cover this country with permanent disgrace."
Every man who could ply an oar pulled up to give Mr Gladstone a cheer.
Gladstone became concerned with the situation of "coal whippers".
When Gladstone first joined Palmerston's government in 1859, he had opposed further electoral reform, but he changed his position during Palmerston's last premiership, and by 1865 he was firmly in favour of enfranchising the working classes in towns; the policy caused friction with Palmerston, who strongly opposed enfranchisement.
Critics said Gladstone had neglected military affairs and had not acted promptly enough to save the besieged Gordon.
He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1881.
Writing in 1944, the liberal economist Friedrich Hayek said of the change in political attitudes that had occurred since the Great War: "Perhaps nothing shows this change more clearly than that, while there is no lack of sympathetic treatment of Bismarck in contemporary English literature, the name of Gladstone is rarely mentioned by the younger generation without a sneer over his Victorian morality and naive utopianism".
Lord Russell retired in 1867 and Gladstone became leader of the Liberal Party.
After accepting Gladstone's resignation, Peel confessed to a friend, "I really have great difficulty sometimes in exactly comprehending what he means."
Gladstone's Midlothian Campaign of 1879–80 was an early example of many modern political campaigning techniques.
I do not enter into the question now in detail.
Thomas Edison's European agent, Colonel Gouraud, recorded Gladstone's voice several times on phonograph.
In a speech to the Hawarden Amateur Horticultural Society on 17 August 1876, Gladstone remarked "I am delighted to see how many young boys and girls have come forward to obtain honourable marks of recognition on this occasion,—if any effectual good is to be done to them, it must be done by teaching and encouraging them and helping them to help themselves.
They often compared Lloyd George unfavourably with Gladstone.
He is ridiculed, no doubt, for what is called saving candle-ends and cheese-parings.
He resigned the Premiership on 2 March.
Gladstone was also Britain's oldest Prime Minister; he resigned for the final time when he was 84 years old.
Gladstone opposed increasing public expenditure on the naval estimates, in the tradition of free trade liberalism of his earlier political career as Chancellor.
Visitors at Hawarden in October were "shocked...by some rather wild language on the Dock labourers question".
Thirdly, laws that prevented people from acting freely to improve themselves were reformed.
The former predeceased his father.
The historian Thomas Babington Macaulay and other critics ridiculed his weak arguments and tore them to shreds.
Cobden was sent as Britain's representative to the negotiations with France's Michel Chevalier for a free trade treaty between the two countries.
The passage Gladstone alluded to was one where Spencer had spoken of "the behaviour of the so-called Liberal party".
The deficit for the year would be £2,840,000 (estimated revenue £56,680,000; estimated expenditure £59,420,000).
The government also passed the Third Reform Act.
This, of course, implied that a mandate was coming from the Queen charging Mr. Gladstone with the formation of his first Government.
during the first half of the year so that he could obtain the additional revenue in one year.
And I mean the liberalism of Mr Gladstone, not of the latter-day collectivists".
Gladstone's intensely religious mother was an evangelical of Scottish Episcopal origins, and his father joined the Church of England, having been a Presbyterian when he first settled in Liverpool.
(for "Murderer of Gordon").
It is just like learning the grammar then, which when once learned need not be referred to afterwards".
The proposal in the Commons of one bill only per session for the national finances was a precedent uniformly followed from that date until 1910, and it has been ever since the rule.
He served until 1855, a few weeks into Lord Palmerston's first premiership, and resigned along with the rest of the Peelites after a motion was passed to appoint a committee of inquiry into the conduct of the war.
The electoral address had promised Home Rule and the disestablishment of the Scottish and Welsh Churches.
File:From Vladaya to Chalite b 20090407 010.JPG|A High School named after William Gladstone in Sofia, Bulgaria
I do not say it is an easy one; I do not say that it will be solved in a moment; but I do say this, that until society is able to offer to the industrious labourer at the end of a long and blameless life something better than the workhouse, society will not have discharged its duties to its poorer members".
In December 1831 he achieved the double first-class degree he had long desired.
This speech has been described by Eugenio Biagini as having "no parallel in the rest of Europe except in the rhetoric of the toughest socialist leaders".
When an unemployed miner (Daniel Jones) wrote to him to complain of his unemployment and low wages, Gladstone gave what H. C. G. Matthew has called "the classic mid-Victorian reply" on 20 October 1869:
Gladstone served as President of the Oxford Union debating society, where he developed a reputation as an orator, which followed him into the House of Commons.
During the late 1840s, when he was out of office, he worked extensively to turn Hawarden into a viable business.
His term saw the end of the Second Anglo-Afghan War, First Boer War and the war against the Mahdi in Sudan.
On 13 January Gladstone claimed he had strong Conservative instincts and that "In all matters of custom and tradition, even the Tories look upon me as the chief Conservative that is".
Gladstone's role in the decision to invade was described as relatively hands-off, and the ultimate responsibility was borne by certain members of his cabinet such as Spencer Cavendish, Secretary of State for India, Thomas Baring, 1st Earl of Northbrook, First Lord of the Admiralty, Hugh Childers, Secretary of State for War, and Granville Leveson-Gower, 2nd Earl Granville, the Foreign Secretary.
When it was passed Disraeli took the hint and called a General Election.
The social problems that confront us are many and formidable.
Gladstone's popularity rested on his taxation policies which meant to his supporters balance, social equity and political justice.
In 1873, his leadership led to the passage of laws restructuring the High Courts.
It is, indeed, not too much to say that his conception of Liberalism was the negation of Socialism.
He was re-elected for the University of Oxford (i.e.
The issue split the Liberal Party (a breakaway group went on to create the Liberal Unionist party) and the bill was thrown out on the second reading, ending his government after only a few months and inaugurating another headed by Lord Salisbury.
The dissolution itself was reported in ''The Times'' on 24 January on 30 January, the names of the first fourteen MPs for uncontested seats were published; by 9 February a Conservative victory was apparent.
To his great surprise he was defeated in South Lancashire but winning in Greenwich was able to remain in Parliament.
In the next general election in 1868, the South Lancashire constituency had been broken-up by the Second Reform Act into two: South East Lancashire and South West Lancashire.
"Syncope" meant failure of the heart and "senility" in the nineteenth century was an infirmity of advanced old age, rather than a loss of mental faculties.
Gladstone, says his biographer, "totally rejected the widespread English view that the Irish had no taste for justice, common sense, moderation our national prosperity and looked only to perpetual strife and dissension".
Gladstone was associated with the Charity Organization Society's first annual report in 1870.
Gladstone believed that the right to combination used by British workers was in jeopardy when it could be denied to Irish workers.
He was obliged to be in bed, and he was ordered to remain there, but the time had come for the confession of sin and the receiving of absolution.
He therefore increased the number of people eligible to pay it by lowering the threshold from £150 to £100.
For it is our party which is dedicated to good housekeeping—indeed, I would not mind betting that if Mr Gladstone were alive today he would apply to join the Conservative Party".
Other historians argue that the invasion occurred to protect the interests of British investors with assets in Egypt and also to boost the political popularity of the Liberal Party.
In 1847 Gladstone helped to establish Glenalmond College, then The Holy and Undivided Trinity College at Glenalmond.
He declared in the Commons on 19 December that naval rearmament would commit the government to expenditure over a number of years and would subvert "the principle of annual account, annual proposition, annual approval by the House of Commons, which...is the only way of maintaining regularity, and that regularity is the only talisman which will secure Parliamentary control".
On 12 September 1859 the Radical MP Richard Cobden visited Gladstone, who recorded it in his diary: "... further conv.
Following the success of his double first, William travelled with his brother John on a Grand Tour of Europe, visiting Belgium, France, Germany and Italy.
In 1861 the tax was reduced to ninepence (£0–0s–9d), in 1863 to sevenpence, in 1864 to fivepence and in 1865 to fourpence.
Less noticed at the time was his practice of replacing the trees felled by planting new saplings.
He left Parliament in 1895 and died three years later aged 88.
Some leading Conservatives at this time were contemplating an alliance between the aristocracy and the working class against the capitalist class, an idea called the New Social Alliance.
Gladstone is famous for his oratory, his religiosity, his liberalism, his rivalry with the Conservative Leader Benjamin Disraeli, and for his poor relations with Queen Victoria, who once complained, "He always addresses me as if I were a public meeting."
He also passed the Second Land Act (the First, in 1870, had entitled Irish tenants, if evicted, to compensation for improvements which they had made on their property, but had had little effect) which gave Irish tenants the "3Fs"&nbsp;– fair rent, fixity of tenure and free sale.
