Another of the Sherman daughters, Eleanor, was married to Alexander Montgomery Thackara at General Sherman's home in Washington, D.C., on May 5, 1880.
However, Sherman left forces under Maj. Gens.
He soon rendezvoused at Goldsborough, North Carolina, with Union troops awaiting him there after the capture of Fort Fisher and Wilmington.
Subsequently, Sherman shifted to the publishing house of Charles L. Webster & Co., the publisher of Grant's memoirs.
His foster family, including his future wife Ellen, were devout Catholics, and Sherman was re-baptized and later married in the Catholic rite.
The massive Confederate attack on the morning of April 6, 1862, took most of the senior Union commanders by surprise.
The first stamp issue to honor him was released on March 21, 1893, a little more than two years after his death.
In the Academy Award winning Errol Morris documentary ''The Fog of War'', Robert McNamara recalls an anecdote he read about Sherman during the Civil War, in which the mayor of Atlanta pleaded with Sherman for mercy before he torched the city to the ground, to which Sherman responded, "War is cruelty."
Shortly after the Union forces occupied Corinth on May 30, Sherman persuaded Grant not to leave his command, despite the serious difficulties he was having with Halleck.
He proved an effective and popular leader of the institution, which later became Louisiana State University (LSU).
Sherman's birth family was Presbyterian and he was originally baptized as such.
Meanwhile, in August, Sherman "learned that I had been commissioned a major-general in the regular army, which was unexpected, and not desired until successful in the capture of Atlanta."
Lincoln happened to be at City Point at the same time, allowing the only three-way meetings of Lincoln, Grant, and Sherman during the war.
Like her mother, Ellen Ewing Sherman was a devout Roman Catholic, and the Shermans' eight children were reared in that faith.
DeWolfe Howe (New York: Charles Scribner's Son, 1909) – edited letters to his wife, Ellen Ewing Sherman, from 1837 to 1888.
In late March, Sherman briefly left his forces and traveled to City Point, Virginia, to consult with Grant.
During the long and complicated campaign against Vicksburg, one newspaper complained that the "army was being ruined in mud-turtle expeditions, under the leadership of a drunkard Grant, whose confidential adviser Sherman was a lunatic."
Around 1868, Sherman began to write a "private" recollection for his children about his life before the Civil War, identified now as his unpublished "Autobiography, 1828–1861".
After Sherman died in 1891, there were dueling new editions of his memoirs.
While trying to hold himself aloof from controversy, he observed firsthand the efforts of Congressman Frank Blair, who later served under Sherman, to hold Missouri in the Union.
Sherman was distantly related to American founding father Roger Sherman and grew to admire him.
Fires began that night and by next morning most of the central city was destroyed.
The historian John D. Winters in ''The Civil War in Louisiana'' (1963) describes Sherman:
Missing from this edition is the useful biographical material contained in the 1891 Johnson and Blaine editions.
Meanwhile, Charles L. Webster & Co. issued a "fourth edition, revised, corrected, and complete" with the text of Sherman's second edition, a new chapter prepared under the auspices of the Sherman family bringing the general's life from his retirement to his death and funeral, and an appreciation by politician James G. Blaine (who was related to Sherman's wife).
Sherman would marry his foster sister, Ellen Boyle Ewing, at age 30 and have eight children with her.
This appears to have been a consequence of the animosity among both Union soldiers and officers to the state that they regarded as the "cockpit of secession."
* ''The Sherman Letters: Correspondence Between General Sherman and Senator Sherman from 1837 to 1891,'' edited by Rachel Sherman Thorndike (New York: Charles Scribner's Son, 1894) – edited letters to his brother, Senator John Sherman, from 1837 to 1891.
Some of these letters are rather personal in nature, rather than relating directly to operational activities of the army.
Sherman is one of the few generals to have appeared on several different US postage stamp issues.
In June 1865, two months after Robert E. Lee's surrender at Appomattox, General Sherman received his first postwar command, originally called the Military Division of the Mississippi, later the Military Division of the Missouri, which came to comprise the territory between the Mississippi River and the Rocky Mountains.
To escape these difficulties, from 1874 to 1876, he moved his headquarters to St. Louis, Missouri, returning to Washington only upon the appointment of Alphonso Taft as Secretary of War and the promise of more authority.
He went on to summarize vividly his hard-war philosophy and to add, in effect, that he really did not want the help of liberated slaves in subduing the South:
Colonel Joseph P. Taylor, the brother of the late President Zachary Taylor, declared that "if you had hunted the whole army, from one end of it to the other, you could not have found a man in it more admirably suited for the position in every respect than Sherman."
The new edition added a second preface, a chapter about his life up to 1846, a chapter concerning the post-war period (ending with his 1884 retirement from the army), several appendices, portraits, improved maps, and an index (1886 edition:
Sherman's troops were sent to relieve them.
General Sherman's body was then transported to St. Louis, where another service was conducted on 21 February 1891 at a local Catholic church.
On June 19, 1879, Sherman delivered an address to the graduating class of the Michigan Military Academy, in which he may have uttered the famous phrase "War Is Hell".
Sherman went to Lancaster, Ohio, to recuperate.
In 1864, Ellen took up temporary residence in South Bend, Indiana, to have her young family educated at the University of Notre Dame and St. Mary's College.
In 1874, with Sherman having become world-famous, their eldest child, Marie Ewing ("Minnie") Sherman, also had a politically prominent wedding, attended by President Ulysses S. Grant and commemorated by a generous gift from the Khedive of Egypt.
In February 1864, he led an expedition to Meridian, Mississippi, to disrupt Confederate infrastructure.
At the end of this campaign, known as Sherman's March to the Sea, his troops captured Savannah on December 21, 1864.
In 1848, Sherman accompanied the military governor of California, Col. Richard Barnes Mason, in the inspection that officially confirmed that gold had been discovered in the region, thus inaugurating the California Gold Rush.
Eventually, Sherman won approval from his superiors for a plan to cut loose from his communications and march south, having advised Grant that he could "make Georgia howl."
Sherman then dispatched a famous message to Lincoln, offering him the city as a Christmas present.
Upon graduation in 1840, Sherman entered the Army as a second lieutenant in the 3rd U.S.
President Lincoln, however, was impressed by Sherman while visiting the troops on July 23 and promoted him to brigadier general of volunteers (effective May 17, 1861, with seniority in rank to Ulysses S. Grant, his future commander).
As Grant took overall command of the armies of the United States, Sherman wrote to him outlining his strategy to bring the war to an end concluding that "if you can whip Lee and I can march to the Atlantic I think ol' Uncle Abe will give us twenty days leave to see the young folks."
Sherman's military record in 1862–63 was mixed.
He took no precautions beyond strengthening his picket lines, and refused to entrench, build abatis, or push out reconnaissance patrols.
Despite this language, there was little large-scale military action taken against the Indians during the first three years of Sherman's tenure, as Sherman was willing to let the process of negotiations play out in order to buy time to procure more troops and allow the completion of the Union Pacific and Kansas Pacific Railroads.
Sherman earned a brevet promotion to captain for his "meritorious service", but his lack of a combat assignment discouraged him and may have contributed to his decision to resign his commission.
Sherman's greatest contribution to the war, the strategy of total warfare—endorsed by General Grant and President Lincoln—has been the subject of controversy.
In early 1858, he returned to California to wrap-up the bank's affairs there.
When Lincoln called Grant east in the spring of 1864 to take command of all the Union armies, Grant appointed Sherman (by then known to his soldiers as "Uncle Billy") to succeed him as head of the Military Division of the Mississippi, which entailed command of Union troops in the Western Theater of the war.
He became exceedingly pessimistic about the outlook for his command and he complained frequently to Washington, D.C. about shortages while providing exaggerated estimates of the strength of the rebel forces.
Republican Governor Daniel Chamberlain appealed to President Ulysses S. Grant for military assistance.
On July 25, 1866, Congress created the rank of General of the Army for Grant and then promoted Sherman to lieutenant general.
His father Charles Robert Sherman, a successful lawyer who sat on the Ohio Supreme Court, died unexpectedly in 1829.
According to Sherman, the trek across the Lumber River, and through the swamps, pocosins, and creeks of Robeson County was "the damnedest marching I ever saw."
Historian James M. McPherson has concluded that:
On hearing of South Carolina's secession from the United States, Sherman observed to a close friend, Professor David F. Boyd of Virginia, an enthusiastic secessionist:
For instance, Alabama-born Major Henry Hitchcock, who served in Sherman's staff, declared that "it is a terrible thing to consume and destroy the sustenance of thousands of people," but if the scorched earth strategy served "to paralyze their husbands and fathers who are fighting ... it is mercy in the end."
His performance was praised by Grant and Halleck and after the battle, and he was promoted to major general of volunteers, effective May 1, 1862.
Sherman's final significant military engagement was a victory over Johnston's troops at the Battle of Bentonville, March 19–21.
When Grant became president in 1869, Sherman was appointed Commanding General of the United States Army and promoted to General of the Army.
There also are at least five published collections of Sherman correspondence:
(In March, Halleck's command was redesignated the Department of the Mississippi and enlarged to unify command in the West).
In December, he was put on leave by Maj. Gen. Henry W. Halleck, commander of the Department of the Missouri, who considered him unfit for duty.
He would eventually become one of the few high-ranking officers during the Civil War who had not fought in Mexico.
Instead of complying, he resigned his position as superintendent and returned to the North, declaring to the governor of Louisiana, "On no earthly account will I do any act or think any thought hostile ... to the ... United States."
Sherman's initial assignments were rear-echelon commands, first of an instructional barracks near St. Louis and then in command of the District of Cairo.
The USS ''General Sherman,'' a Civil War gunboat, was also named after him as was Fort Sherman.
Lincoln's defeat could well have meant the victory of the Confederacy, as the Democratic Party platform called for peace negotiations based on the acknowledgment of the Confederacy's independence.
Volume I,  Volume II).
Upon hearing that Sherman's men were advancing on corduroy roads through the Salkehatchie swamps at a rate of a dozen miles per day, Johnston "made up his mind that there had been no such army in existence since the days of Julius Caesar."
During this time, Sherman reorganized frontier forts to reflect the shifting frontier.
Thereafter, Sherman became president of the St. Louis Railroad, a streetcar company, a position he would hold for only a few months.
Sherman was not an abolitionist before the war and, like others of his time and background, he did not believe in "Negro equality."
The burning of Columbia has engendered controversy ever since, with some claiming the fires were accidental, others a deliberate act of vengeance, and still others that the retreating Confederates burned bales of cotton on their way out of town.
His first major test under Grant was at the Battle of Shiloh.
However, Sherman was successful in negotiating other treaties, such as the removal of Navajos from the Bosque Redondo to traditional lands in Western New Mexico.
With five different issues to his name, Sherman has featured more prominently in US postage than most US presidents.
A bill was introduced in Congress to promote Sherman to Grant's rank of lieutenant general, probably with a view towards having him replace Grant as commander of the Union Army.
Though exact figures are not available, the loss of civilian life appears to have been very small.
Sherman offered Grant an example from his own life, "Before the battle of Shiloh, I was cast down by a mere newspaper assertion of 'crazy', but that single battle gave me new life, and I'm now in high feather."
One of the most serious accusations against Sherman was that he allowed his troops to burn the city of Columbia.
In July, Grant's situation improved when Halleck left for the East to become general-in-chief, and Sherman became the military governor of occupied Memphis.
The practice of heating rails and bending them around trees, leaving behind what came to be known as "Sherman's neckties," made repairs difficult.
The Sherman Monument (1900) in Muskegon, Michigan features a bronze statue by John Massey Rhind, and the Sherman Monument (1903) in Arlington National Cemetery features a smaller version of Saint-Gaudens's equestrian statue.
This manuscript is held by the Ohio Historical Society.
The Post Office released a second and third Sherman issue of 1895, both almost identical to the first issue, with slight changes in the framework design and color.
However, in May, he offered himself for service in the regular army, and his brother (Senator John Sherman) and other connections maneuvered to get him a commission in the regular army.
While he was at home, his wife Ellen wrote to his brother, Senator John Sherman, seeking advice.
After Grant captured Fort Donelson, Sherman got his wish to serve under Grant when he was assigned on March 1, 1862, to the Army of West Tennessee as commander of the 5th Division.
Liddell Hart credited Sherman with mastery of maneuver warfare (also known as the "indirect approach"), as demonstrated by his series of turning movements against Johnston during the Atlanta Campaign.
In 1867, Gen. O. O. Howard, commander of Sherman's 15th Corps, reportedly said, "It is useless to deny that our troops burnt Columbia, for I saw them in the act."
Liddell Hart also stated that study of Sherman's campaigns had contributed significantly to his own "theory of strategy and tactics in mechanized warfare", which had in turn influenced Heinz Guderian's doctrine of ''Blitzkrieg'' and Rommel's use of tanks during the Second World War.
*''Sherman's Civil War: Selected Correspondence of William T. Sherman, 1860–1865,'' edited by Brooks D. Simpson and Jean V. Berlin (Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 1999) – a large collection of war-time letters (November 1860 to May 1865).
By contrast Sherman was a popular hero in the North and well regarded by his soldiers.
Senator Ewing secured an appointment for the 16-year-old Sherman as a cadet in the United States Military Academy at West Point, where he roomed and became good friends with another important future Civil War General, George H. Thomas.
As an adult, Sherman signed all his correspondence – including to his wife – "W.T.
President Benjamin Harrison sent a telegram to General Sherman's family and ordered all national flags to be flown at half mast.
Having succeeded Anderson at Louisville, Sherman now had principal military responsibility for Kentucky, a border state in which Confederate troops held Columbus and Bowling Green and were present near the Cumberland Gap.
Sherman proceeded with 60,000 of his troops to Washington, D.C., where they marched in the Grand Review of the Armies, on May 24, 1865, and were then disbanded.
Military historians have paid special attention to his Atlanta campaign and the March to the Sea, generally giving him high marks as an innovative strategist and quick-witted tactician.
In 1875, ten years after the end of the Civil War, Sherman became one of the first Civil War generals to publish a memoir.
I am ''not'' and cannot be."
Major monuments to Sherman include the gilded bronze Sherman Memorial (1902) by Augustus Saint-Gaudens at the main entrance to Central Park in New York City, and the Sherman Monument (1903) by Carl Rohl-Smith near President's Park in Washington, D.C.
Operating from Paducah, Kentucky, he provided logistical support for the operations of Brig.
Although Sherman was technically the senior officer at this time, he wrote to Grant, "I feel anxious about you as I know the great facilities the Confederates have of concentration by means of the River and R Road, but I have faith in you—Command me in any way."
Thus the capture of Atlanta, coming when it did, may have been Sherman's greatest contribution to the Union cause.
After ordering almost all civilians to leave the city in September, Sherman gave instructions that all military and government buildings in Atlanta be burned, although many private homes and shops were burned as well.
She complained of "that melancholy insanity to which your family is subject."
His problems were compounded when the ''Cincinnati Commercial'' described him as "insane."
During the Chattanooga Campaign in November, under Grant's overall command, Sherman quickly took his assigned target of Billy Goat Hill at the north end of Missionary Ridge, only to discover that it was not part of the ridge at all, but rather a detached spur separated from the main spine by a rock-strewn ravine.
In his ''Memoirs'', Sherman noted political pressures in 1864–1865 to encourage the escape of slaves, in part to avoid the possibility that "'able-bodied slaves will be called into the military service of the rebels.'"
Lick 'em tomorrow, though."
Like Grant, Sherman was convinced that the Confederacy's strategic, economic, and psychological ability to wage further war needed to be definitively crushed if the fighting were to end.
The severity of the destructive acts by Union troops was significantly greater in South Carolina than in Georgia or North Carolina.
While traveling to Chattanooga, Sherman departed Memphis on a train that arrived at the Battle of Collierville, Tenn., while the Union garrison there was under attack on October 11, 1863.
This created the threat that Hood would move north into Tennessee.
Harrison, in a message to the Senate and the House of Representatives, wrote that:
Much of Sherman's time as Commanding General was devoted to making the Western and Plains states safe for settlement through the continuation of the Indian Wars, which three significant campaigns during this time being the Modoc War, the Great Sioux War of 1876 and the Nez Perce War.
Sherman's efforts were assisted by George Henry Thomas's army's successful assault on the center of the Confederate line, a movement originally intended as a diversion.
Sherman reported that his middle name came from his father having "caught a fancy for the great chief of the Shawnees, 'Tecumseh."
Consuming supplies, wrecking infrastructure, and undermining morale were Sherman's stated goals, and several of his Southern contemporaries noted this and commented on it.
Grant, the previous commander of the District of Cairo, had recently won a major victory at Fort Henry (February 6, 1862) and been given command of the ill-defined District of West Tennessee.
He was assigned to serve under Robert Anderson in the Department of the Cumberland in Louisville, Kentucky, and in October Sherman succeeded Anderson in command of the department.
In 1945, President Harry S. Truman would say: "Sherman was wrong.
He told Grant that, if he remained in the army, "some happy accident might restore you to favor and your true place."
In his memoirs, Sherman said, "In my official report of this conflagration I distinctly charged it to General Wade Hampton, and confess I did so pointedly to shake the faith of his people in him, for he was in my opinion a braggart and professed to be the special champion of South Carolina."
After his father's death, the nine-year-old Sherman was raised by a Lancaster neighbor and family friend, attorney Thomas Ewing, Sr., a prominent member of the Whig Party who served as senator from Ohio and as the first Secretary of the Interior.
While in Savannah, Sherman learned from a newspaper that his infant son Charles Celestine had died during the Savannah Campaign; the general had never seen the child.
Union soldiers who foraged from Southern homes became known as bummers.
* ''Home Letters of General Sherman,'' edited by M.A.
Sherman thought that those terms were consistent with the views Lincoln had expressed at City Point, but the general had not been given the authority, by General Grant, the newly installed President Andrew Johnson, or the Cabinet, to offer those terms.
It was a bitterly cold day and a friend of Johnston, fearing that the general might become ill, asked him to put on his hat.
After the bombardment of Fort Sumter, Sherman hesitated about committing to military service and ridiculed Lincoln's call for 75,000 three-month volunteers to quell secession, reportedly saying: "Why, you might as well attempt to put out the flames of a burning house with a squirt-gun."
Very critical press reports appeared about him after an October visit to Louisville by the Secretary of War, Simon Cameron, and in early November 1861 Sherman insisted that he be relieved.
He lived most of the rest of his life in New York City.
One of his younger brothers, John Sherman, served as a U.S. senator and Cabinet secretary.
This success made Sherman a household name and helped ensure Lincoln's presidential re-election in November.
File:Lincoln, Grant, Sherman, Farragut - an account of the gift, the erection and the dedication of the bronze statues given by Charles H. Hackley to the city of Muskegon, Michigan - unveiled in Hackley (14577672349).jpg|Sherman Monument (1900), Muskegon, Michigan
This difficult-to-find edition was substantively identical to the second (except for the probable omission of Sherman's short 1875 and 1886 prefaces).
The orders provided for the settlement of 40,000 freed slaves and black refugees on land expropriated from white landowners in South Carolina, Georgia, and Florida.
Some abolitionists accused Sherman of doing little to alleviate the precarious living conditions of the freed slaves.
At Shiloh, Sherman was wounded twice—in the hand and shoulder—and had three horses shot out from under him.
Sherman's military campaigns of 1864 and 1865 freed many slaves, who greeted him "as a second Moses or Aaron" and joined his marches through Georgia and the Carolinas by the tens of thousands.
While many of his colleagues saw action in the Mexican–American War, Sherman performed administrative duties in the captured territory of California.
During this period, he stayed in contact with war veterans, and through them accepted honorary membership into the Phi Kappa Psi Fraternity and the Irving Literary Society.
Although his brother John was well known as an antislavery congressman, Sherman did not oppose slavery and was sympathetic to Southerners' defense of the institution.
Such a categorical rejection of a candidacy is now referred to as a "Shermanesque statement."
When the Medicine Lodge Treaty was broken in 1868, Sherman authorized his subordinate in Missouri, Philip Sheridan, to conduct the Winter Campaign of 1868–69 (of which the Battle of Washita River was a part), where Sheridan used hard-war tactics similar to those he and Sherman had employed in the Civil War.
At the insistence of Johnston and of Confederate President Jefferson Davis, Sherman conditionally agreed to generous terms that dealt with both political and military issues.
General Joseph E. Johnston, the Confederate officer who had commanded the resistance to Sherman's troops in Georgia and the Carolinas, served as a pallbearer in New York City.
Following Lee's surrender to Grant at Appomattox Court House and the assassination of President Lincoln, Sherman met with Johnston at Bennett Place in Durham, North Carolina, to negotiate a Confederate surrender.
Since an account in a 1932 biography about Sherman, it has often been reported that, as an infant, Sherman was named simply Tecumseh.
Many of Sherman's official war-time letters (and other items) appear in the  ''Official Records of the War of the Rebellion''.
He proceeded to lead his troops to the capture of the city of Atlanta, a military success that contributed to the re-election of U.S. President Abraham Lincoln.
Basil H. Liddell Hart, who built up Sherman's reputation by exaggerating his "atrocities" and filtering his actions through their ideas about modern warfare.
Sherman is buried in Calvary Cemetery in St. Louis.
Sherman proceeded to invade the state of Georgia with three armies: the 60,000-strong Army of the Cumberland under George Henry Thomas, the 25,000-strong Army of the Tennessee under James B. McPherson, and the 13,000-strong Army of the Ohio under John M. Schofield.
However he never engaged in any program to actually eradicate the buffalo.
Sherman as College President,'' edited by Walter L. Fleming (Cleveland: The Arthur H. Clark Co., 1912) – edited letters and other documents from Sherman's 1859–1861 service as superintendent of the Louisiana Seminary of Learning and Military Academy.
Local Native American Lumbee guides helped Sherman's army cross the Lumber River, which was flooded by torrential rains, into North Carolina.
His ''Memoirs of General William T. Sherman.
In May 1865, after the major Confederate armies had surrendered, Sherman wrote in a personal letter:
Sherman captured the state capital of Columbia, South Carolina, on February 17, 1865.
Therefore, he believed that the North had to conduct its campaign as a war of conquest and employ scorched earth tactics to break the backbone of the rebellion.
This edition contains Sherman's two prefaces, his 1886 text, and the materials added in the 1891 Blaine edition.
His friends and family always called him "Cump."
*''Sherman at War,'' edited by Joseph H. Ewing (Dayton, OH: Morningside, 1992) – approximately thirty war time letters to Sherman's father-in-law, Thomas Ewing, and one of his brothers-in-law, Philemon B. Ewing.
Sherman called this harsh tactic of material war "hard war," often seen as a species of total war.
However, Sherman did add the appendices, in which he published the views of some others.
Thus, this virtually invisible edition of Sherman's memoirs is actually the most comprehensive version.
Sherman and Ord reached the town of Yerba Buena, in California, two days before its name was changed to San Francisco.
Accusations that civilians were targeted and war crimes were committed on the march have made Sherman a controversial figure to this day, particularly in the American South.
During the Civil War, Sherman declined to employ black troops in his armies.
His devastation of railroads and plantations mattered less than the March's insult to southern dignity, especially its unprotected womanhood.
Sherman's Atlanta Campaign concluded successfully on September 2, 1864, with the capture of the city, which Hood had been forced to abandon.
Sherman also clashed with Eastern humanitarians, who were critical of the Army's killing of Indians and had apparently found an ally in President Grant.
He was promptly replaced by Brigadier General Don Carlos Buell and transferred to St. Louis, Missouri.
After the 1866 Fetterman Massacre, Sherman wrote Grant that "we must act with vindictive earnestness against the Sioux, even to their extermination, men, women and children."
The speed and efficiency of the destruction by Sherman's army was remarkable.
He received a telegram summoning him to Washington on June 7.
He voiced this view in remarks to a joint session of the Texas legislature in 1875.
In July, the cautious Johnston was replaced by the more aggressive John Bell Hood, who played to Sherman's strength by challenging him to direct battles on open ground.
I'm telling you I find peace is hell."
Sherman began his Civil War career serving in the First Battle of Bull Run and Kentucky in 1861.
British military historian B. H. Liddell Hart famously declared that Sherman was "the first modern general".
On April 11, 1880, he addressed a crowd of more than 10,000 at Columbus, Ohio: "There is many a boy here today who looks on war as all glory, but, boys, it is all hell."
Johnston did catch a serious cold and died one month later of pneumonia.
When the bank failed during the financial Panic of 1857, he closed the New York branch.
George H. Thomas and John M. Schofield to deal with Hood; their forces eventually smashed Hood's army in the battles of Franklin (November 30) and Nashville (December 15–16).
Sherman proved instrumental to the successful Union counterattack of April 7, 1862.
Before the war, Sherman at times even expressed some sympathy with the view of Southern whites that the black race was benefiting from slavery, although he opposed breaking up slave families and advocated teaching slaves to read and write.
He thus very accurately described the four years of war to come.
In 1904 and 1913, Sherman's youngest son (Philemon Tecumseh Sherman) republished the memoirs, ironically with Appleton (not Charles L. Webster & Co.).
