McKinley campaigned widely for Republicans in the 1894 midterm congressional elections; many party candidates in districts where he spoke were successful.
Bryan's financial radicalism shocked bankers—they thought his inflationary program would bankrupt the railroads and ruin the economy.
Dawes eventually became Comptroller of the Currency; he recorded in his published diary that he had strongly urged McKinley to appoint as secretary the successful candidate, Lyman J. Gage, president of the First National Bank of Chicago and a Gold Democrat.
In January 1898, Spain promised some concessions to the rebels, but when American consul Fitzhugh Lee reported riots in Havana, McKinley agreed to send the battleship USS ''Maine'' there to protect American lives and property.
The United States had effectively been placed on the gold standard by the Coinage Act of 1873; when silver prices dropped significantly, many sought to make silver again a legal tender, equally with gold.
Taking the case ''pro bono,'' he was successful in getting all but one of the miners acquitted.
In so doing, McKinley voted against the position of the House Republican leader, his fellow Ohioan and friend, James Garfield.
Although McKinley was initially inclined to allow Long to choose his own assistant, there was considerable pressure on the President-elect to appoint Theodore Roosevelt, head of the New York City Police Commission and a former state assemblyman.
Just before the war's end, McKinley received his final promotion, a brevet commission as major.
Instead, McKinley's wealthy supporters, including Hanna and Chicago publisher H. H. Kohlsaat, became trustees of a fund from which the notes would be paid.
Adoption of the platform caused some western delegates, led by Colorado Senator Henry M. Teller, to walk out of the convention.
The stock market, faced with sudden uncertainty, suffered a steep decline—almost unnoticed in the mourning.
McKinley refused, and Cortelyou arranged for additional security for the trip.
There, the elder McKinley was born in Pine Township, Mercer County.
As many of his countrymen called for war to liberate Cuba, McKinley favored a peaceful approach, hoping that through negotiation, Spain might be convinced to grant Cuba independence, or at least to allow the Cubans some measure of autonomy.
By that time, Hayes had been nominated for president, and McKinley campaigned for him while running his own congressional campaign.
American opinion favored the rebels, and McKinley shared in their outrage against Spanish policies.
Closer to home, McKinley and Hay engaged in negotiations with Britain over the possible construction of a canal across Central America.
It is manifest destiny."
Now, with American business and military interests even more involved in Asia, a canal seemed more essential than ever, and McKinley pressed for a renegotiation of the treaty.
Hunter believed the troops at Lynchburg were too powerful, however, and the brigade returned to West Virginia.
The next day, the Spanish Caribbean squadron, which had been sheltering in Santiago's harbor, broke for the open sea but was intercepted and destroyed by Rear Admiral William T. Sampson's North Atlantic Squadron in the largest naval battle of the war.
The case raised McKinley's standing among laborers, a crucial part of the Stark County electorate, and also introduced him to Hanna, who would become his strongest backer in years to come.
It is unclear when William McKinley began to seriously prepare a run for president.
The silverites took control of the 1896 Democratic National Convention and chose William Jennings Bryan for president; he had electrified the delegates with his Cross of Gold speech.
Soon after Cleveland's return to office, hard times struck the nation with the Panic of 1893.
After some difficulties, Ohio Governor Bushnell appointed Hanna to the Senate.
The territorial expansion of 1898 is often seen by historians as the beginning of American empire.
Morgan suggests that this relatively low ranking is due to a perception among historians that while many decisions during McKinley's presidency profoundly affected the nation's future, he more followed public opinion than led it, and that McKinley's standing has suffered from altered public expectations of the presidency.
American negotiators soon concluded a reciprocity treaty with France, and the two nations approached Britain to gauge British enthusiasm for bimetallism.
Public opinion and the newspapers demanded war, but McKinley insisted that a court of inquiry first determine whether the explosion was accidental.
William McKinley, Jr. was born in 1843 in Niles, Ohio, the seventh child of William and Nancy (née Allison) McKinley.
As pressure for war mounted in Congress, McKinley continued to negotiate for Cuban independence.
The administration's response to racial violence was minimal, causing him to lose black support.
Three days after the battle, McKinley was assigned to duty in the brigade quartermaster office, where he worked both to supply his regiment, and as a clerk.
The former congressman spent much of the second half of 1891 campaigning against Campbell, beginning in his birthplace of Niles.
The new boundaries seemed good, based on past results, for a Democratic majority of 2000 to 3000.
Convinced Sherman could not win, Foraker threw his support to the unsuccessful Republican 1884 presidential nominee, Maine Senator James G. Blaine.
This did not occur; the former first lady accompanied her husband on the funeral train.
McKinley signed the bill into law and agreed to begin negotiations on an international bimetallism standard.
In the bitterness that followed the convention, Hanna abandoned Foraker, and for the rest of McKinley's life, the Ohio Republican Party was divided into two factions, one aligned with McKinley, Sherman, and Hanna and the other with Foraker.
The President did appoint George B. Jackson, a former slave, to the post of customs collector in Presidio, Texas.
He did not ask for war, but Congress declared war anyway on April 20, with the addition of the Teller Amendment, which disavowed any intention of annexing Cuba.
McKinley was taken to the Milburn House.
The bosses still hoped to deny McKinley a first-ballot majority at the convention by boosting support for local favorite son candidates such as Quay, New York Governor (and former vice president) Levi P. Morton, and Illinois Senator Shelby Cullom.
Ida McKinley developed epilepsy around the same time and thereafter disliked her husband's leaving her side.
McKinley biographer Margaret Leech noted that Canton had become prosperous as a center for the manufacture of farm equipment because of protection, and that this may have helped form his political views.
In 1878, McKinley faced election in a redrawn 17th district; he won anyway, causing Hayes to exult, "Oh, the good luck of McKinley!
Cortelyou, who served in three Cabinet positions under Theodore Roosevelt, became a combination press secretary and chief of staff to McKinley.
McKinley supported Foraker for Senate and Bushnell (who was of Foraker's faction) for governor; in return, the new senator-elect agreed to back McKinley's presidential ambitions.
"Under free trade the trader is the master and the producer the slave.
Two of the great issues of the day, tariff reform and free silver, became intertwined in 1897.
He also spent time at Mount Union College in Alliance, Ohio, where he joined Sigma Alpha Epsilon.
Although no declared candidate opposed Harrison, many Republicans were ready to dump the President from the ticket if an alternative emerged.
By 1895, the conflict had expanded to a war for Cuban independence.
On the morning of September 13, McKinley took a turn for the worse.
Critics replied by saying that he could at least publicly condemn such events, as Harrison had done.
Even before peace negotiations began with Spain, McKinley asked Congress to set up a commission to examine trade opportunities in the region and espoused an "Open Door Policy", in which all nations would freely trade with China and none would seek to violate that nation's territorial integrity.
Fearing that the Ohio governor would emerge as a candidate, Harrison's managers arranged for McKinley to be permanent chairman of the convention in Minneapolis, requiring him to play a public, neutral role.
At 2:15&nbsp;a.m. on September 14, President McKinley died.
According to Gould, "The nation experienced a wave of genuine grief at the news of McKinley's passing."
McKinley's wife descended into a deep depression at her baby's death and her health, never robust, grew worse.
Thousands of partisans came from Canton and surrounding towns that evening to hear McKinley speak from his front porch.
Other McKinley appointees who later became major figures include Day, who Roosevelt elevated to the Supreme Court where he remained nearly twenty years, and William Howard Taft, whom McKinley had made Governor-General of the Philippines and who succeeded Roosevelt as president.
Hanna established an unofficial McKinley headquarters near the convention hall, though no active effort was made to convert delegates to McKinley's cause.
The following day, a funeral service was held at the First Methodist Church; the casket was then sealed and taken to the McKinley house, where relatives paid their final respects.
When other contenders such as Speaker Reed and Iowa Senator William B. Allison sent agents outside their states to organize Republicans in support of their candidacies, they found that Hanna's agents had preceded them.
These officials included Cortelyou, who served in three Cabinet positions under Roosevelt, and Dawes, who became vice president under Coolidge.
In July, the Veterans Corps was mustered out of service, and McKinley and Carroll were relieved of their duties.
The expansion of the telegraph and the development of the telephone gave McKinley a greater control over the day-to-day management of the war than previous presidents had enjoyed, and he used the new technologies to direct the army's and navy's movements as far as he was able.
Within a fortnight, the navy had its first victory when the Asiatic Squadron, led by Commodore George Dewey, engaged the Spanish navy at the Battle of Manila Bay in the Philippines, destroying the enemy force without the loss of a single American vessel.
The following year, he continued his studies by attending Albany Law School in New York.
Soon after his second inauguration on March 4, 1901, William and Ida McKinley undertook a six-week tour of the nation.
Blanche K. Bruce, an African American who during Reconstruction had served as senator from Mississippi, received the post of register at the Treasury Department; this post was traditionally given to an African American by Republican presidents.
The war had exposed the difficulty of maintaining a two-ocean navy without a connection closer than Cape Horn.
The resulting Newlands Resolution passed both houses by wide margins, and McKinley signed it into law on July 8, 1898.
That September, McKinley's regiment was called east to reinforce General John Pope's Army of Virginia at the Second Battle of Bull Run.
He did not graduate from either university.
He was elected Ohio's governor in 1891 and 1893, steering a moderate course between capital and labor interests.
The young congressman broke with Hayes on the question of the currency, but it did not affect their friendship.
In the end, McKinley lost by 300 votes, but the Republicans won a statewide majority and claimed a moral victory.
During the war, McKinley also pursued the annexation of the Republic of Hawaii.
These included the removal of Cubans to internment camps near Spanish military bases, a strategy designed to make it hard for the rebels to receive support in the countryside.
By 1886, McKinley, Senator John Sherman, and Governor Joseph B. Foraker were considered the leaders of the Republican party in Ohio.
Day, an Ohio lawyer unfamiliar with diplomacy, was often reticent in meetings; Adee was somewhat deaf.
Their first child, Katherine, was born on Christmas Day 1871.
They followed up the victory with another at Fisher's Hill on September 22, and were engaged once more at Cedar Creek on October 19.
After Cedar Creek, the army stayed in the vicinity through election day, when McKinley cast his first presidential ballot, for the incumbent Republican, Abraham Lincoln.
A second daughter, Ida, followed in 1873, but died the same year.
For 1890, the Democrats gerrymandered McKinley one final time, placing Stark County in the same district as one of the strongest pro-Democrat counties, Holmes, populated by solidly Democratic Pennsylvania Dutch.
He was often bypassed by his first assistant, McKinley's Canton crony Judge William Day, and by the second secretary, Alvey A. Adee.
The new President gave a lengthy inaugural address; he urged tariff reform, and stated that the currency issue would have to await tariff legislation.
According to Gould and later biographer Phillips, given the political climate in the South, with white legislatures passing segregationist laws such as that upheld in ''Plessy v. Ferguson'', there was little McKinley could have done to improve race relations, and he did better than later presidents Theodore Roosevelt, who doubted racial equality, and Woodrow Wilson, who supported segregation.
Retreating into Maryland, the army was reorganized again: Major General Philip Sheridan replaced Hunter, and McKinley, who had been promoted to captain after the battle, was transferred to General Crook's staff.
A controversial aspect of McKinley's presidency is territorial expansion and the question of imperialism—with the exception of the Philippines, granted independence in 1946, the United States retains the territories taken under McKinley.
Two years later, in 1875, Katherine died of typhoid fever.
Shafter laid siege to the city of Santiago, which surrendered on July 17, placing Cuba under effective American control.
McKinley was taken to the Exposition aid station, where the doctor was unable to locate the second bullet.
Many people who had suffered in the hard times sympathized with McKinley, whose popularity grew.
In November, the regiment established winter quarters near Fayetteville (today in West Virginia).
The lame-duck Harrison administration had submitted a treaty of annexation to the Senate; Cleveland, once he returned to office, had sent a special commission to the islands.
Hanna, once he entered public affairs as a political manager and generous contributor, supported Sherman's ambitions, as well as those of Foraker.
William and Ida McKinley are interred there with their daughters, atop a hillside overlooking the city of Canton.
Although his health recovered, family finances declined and McKinley was unable to return to Allegheny, first working as a postal clerk and later taking a job teaching at a school near Poland, Ohio.
Spain refused McKinley's proposals, and on April 11, McKinley turned the matter over to Congress.
The Republican Party sent its leading orators to Canton, including Blaine (then Secretary of State), Speaker Reed and President Harrison.
Doctors issued increasingly optimistic bulletins.
The United States acquired Puerto Rico and the Philippines as well as the island of Guam, and Spain relinquished its claims to Cuba; in exchange, the United States agreed to pay Spain $20 million.
While the regiment went into winter quarters near Charleston, Virginia (present-day West Virginia), McKinley was ordered back to Ohio with some other sergeants to recruit fresh troops.
This was done as the candidate feared an offhand comment by another that might rebound on him.
Morgan alludes to the rise of interest in McKinley as part of the debate over the more assertive American foreign policy of recent decades:
McKinley wrote once the appointment was announced, "the stories regarding Senator Sherman's 'mental decay' are without foundation&nbsp;...
Many supporters recommended him to McKinley for the second spot on the ticket, and Roosevelt believed it would be an excellent stepping stone to the presidency in 1904.
Although Hanna remained active in business and in promoting other Republicans, in the years after 1888, he spent an increasing amount of time boosting McKinley's political career.
Finally assigned to Carroll's staff again, McKinley acted as the general's first and only adjutant.
From his first term in Congress, McKinley was a strong advocate of protective tariffs.
He promoted the 1897 Dingley Tariff to protect manufacturers and factory workers from foreign competition, and in 1900, he secured the passage of the Gold Standard Act.
Cullom proved unable to stand against McKinley despite the support of local Republican machines; at the state convention at the end of April, McKinley completed a near-sweep of Illinois' delegates.
Although McKinley enjoyed meeting the public, Cortelyou was concerned with his security due to recent assassinations by anarchists in Europe, such as the assassination of King Umberto I of Italy the previous year, and twice tried to remove a public reception from the President's rescheduled visit to the Exposition.
The McKinley household was, like many from Ohio's Western Reserve, steeped in Whiggish and abolitionist sentiment, the latter based on the family's staunch Methodist beliefs.
By August, Early was retreating south in the valley, with Sheridan's army in pursuit.
The Ohioan guided the McKinley Tariff of 1890 through Congress; although McKinley's work was altered through the influence of special interests in the Senate, it imposed a number of protective tariffs on foreign goods.
The railroads subsidized the visitors with low excursion rates—the pro-silver Cleveland ''Plain Dealer'' disgustedly stated that going to Canton had been made "cheaper than staying at home".
After initially falling back from the Confederate advance, McKinley helped to rally the troops and turn the tide of the battle.
In addition to visiting Tuskegee Institute and black educator Booker T. Washington, he addressed the Georgia legislature, wearing a badge of gray, and visited Confederate memorials.
Out of office, he was briefly depressed by the setback, but soon vowed to run again.
Hanna, however, was little seen in the campaign; he spent much of his time raising funds for the election of legislators pledged to vote for Sherman in the 1892 senatorial election.
On July 22, the Spanish authorized Jules Cambon, the French Ambassador to the United States, to represent Spain in negotiating peace.
He soon formed a partnership with George W. Belden, an experienced lawyer and former judge.
Graduating in 1859, he enrolled the following year at Allegheny College in Meadville, Pennsylvania.
McKinley, however, was determined to obtain the nomination without making deals, and Hanna accepted that decision.
Competent enough in peacetime, Alger proved inadequate once the conflict with Spain began.
After the war, he settled in Canton, Ohio, where he practiced law and married Ida Saxton.
Rapid economic growth marked McKinley's presidency.
When the Southern states seceded from the Union and the American Civil War began, thousands of men in Ohio volunteered for service.
By 1900, with another campaign ahead and good economic conditions, McKinley urged Congress to pass such a law, and was able to sign the Gold Standard Act on March 14, 1900, using a gold pen to do so.
He was a lifelong pious Methodist.
Nevertheless, many Americans favored annexation, and the cause gained momentum as the United States became embroiled in war with Spain.
Leech noted "the circuitous journey was a cruel ordeal for the woman who huddled in a compartment of the funeral train, praying that the Lord would take her with her Dearest Love".
His political efforts in Ohio were rewarded with the election in November 1895 of a Republican successor as governor, Asa Bushnell, and a Republican legislature that elected Foraker to the Senate.
Vice President Hobart, as was customary at the time, was not invited to Cabinet meetings.
After the 1882 election, McKinley was unseated on an election contest by a near party-line House vote.
McKinley was reluctant, stating to one Roosevelt booster, "I want peace and I am told that your friend Theodore is always getting into rows with everybody."
The Prime Minister, Lord Salisbury, and his government showed some interest in the idea and told the American envoy, Edward O. Wolcott, that he would be amenable to reopening the mints in India to silver coinage if the Viceroy's Executive Council there agreed.
The primary purposes of such imposts was not to raise revenue, but to allow American manufacturing to develop by giving it a price advantage in the domestic market over foreign competitors.
The candidate then responded, speaking on campaign issues in a speech molded to suit the interest of the delegation.
On March 7, 1883, McKinley was elected as a First Class Companion of the District of Columbia Commandery of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States (MOLLUS) - a military society of officers who served in the Union armed forces during the American Civil War and their descendants.
Spain ultimately agreed to a ceasefire on those terms on August 12, and treaty negotiations began in Paris in September 1898.
When the Republican convention began in Philadelphia that June, no vice presidential candidate had overwhelming support, but Roosevelt had the broadest range of support from around the country.
Ways and Means chairman Dingley introduced a new tariff bill (later called the Dingley Act) to revise the Wilson–Gorman Tariff Act of 1894.
By the time the national convention began in St. Louis on June 16, 1896, McKinley had an ample majority of delegates.
McKinley, campaigning mostly on his support for a protective tariff, defeated the Democratic nominee, Levi L. Lamborn, by 3,300 votes, while Hayes won a hotly disputed election to reach the presidency.
She remained in Canton for the remainder of her life, setting up a shrine in her house, and often visiting the receiving vault, until her death at age 59 on May 26, 1907.
Phillips believes that part of McKinley's legacy is the men he included in his administration, who dominated the Republican Party for a quarter century after his death.
Bryan carried only four states outside the solid South, and McKinley even won Bryan's home state of Nebraska.
Lynch, McKinley's opponent in the 1871 election, and his partner, William R. Day, were the opposing counsel, and the mine owners included Mark Hanna, a Cleveland businessman.
Despite the objections, McKenna's nomination was approved unanimously.
Historian Daniel P. Klinghard argued that McKinley's personal control of the 1896 campaign gave him the opportunity to reshape the presidency—rather than simply follow the party platform—by representing himself as the voice of the people.
The distance from Spain and the destruction of the Spanish navy made resupply impossible, and the Spanish government began to look for a way to end the war.
McKinley and his regiment moved to the Shenandoah Valley as the armies broke from winter quarters to resume hostilities.
The governor had never kept track of what he was signing; he believed Walker a sound businessman.
Nevertheless, McKinley sent his cousin, William McKinley Osborne, to have dinner with the 73-year-old senator; he reported back that Sherman seemed as lucid as ever.
On November 6, 1900, he was proven correct, winning the largest victory for any Republican since 1872.
The Northeast was considered most likely safe for McKinley after the early-voting states of Maine and Vermont supported him in September.
File:McKinley Memorial Ohio Statehouse.JPG|McKinley memorial by Hermon MacNeil in front of the Ohio Statehouse, Columbus
Carroll and Hancock encouraged McKinley to apply for a place in the peacetime army, but he declined and returned to Ohio the following month.
The next day, they moved north up the valley into winter quarters near Kernstown.
McKinley initially favored Elihu Root, who had succeeded Alger as Secretary of War, but McKinley decided that Root was doing too good a job at the War Department to move him.
The 1896 presidential election is often seen as a realigning election, in which McKinley's view of a stronger central government building American industry through protective tariffs and a dollar based on gold triumphed.
McKinley objected to delegate votes being cast for him; nevertheless he finished third, behind the renominated Harrison, and behind Blaine, who had sent word he did not want to be considered.
Negotiations with Spain continued as the court considered the evidence, but on March 20, the court ruled that the ''Maine'' was blown up by an underwater mine.
Elected governor of New York on a reform platform in 1898, Roosevelt had his eye on the presidency.
McKinley was sworn in as president on March 4, 1897, as his wife and mother looked on.
When Blaine stated he was not a candidate, Foraker returned to Sherman, but the nomination went to former Indiana senator Benjamin Harrison, who was elected president.
McKenna responded to the criticism of his legal education by taking some courses at Columbia Law School for several months before taking his seat.
Crook's capture added to the confusion as the army was reorganized for the spring campaign, and McKinley found himself serving on the staffs of four different generals over the next fifteen days — Crook, John D. Stevenson, Samuel S. Carroll, and Winfield S. Hancock.
Morgan sees that historical discussion as a subset of the debate over the rise of America as a world power; he expects the debate over McKinley's actions to continue indefinitely without resolution, and notes that however one judges McKinley's actions in American expansion, one of his motivations was to change the lives of Filipinos and Cubans for the better.
McKinley had spoken out against lynching while governor, and most African Americans who could vote supported him in 1896.
Many of their early efforts were focused on the South; Hanna obtained a vacation home in southern Georgia where McKinley visited and met with Republican politicians from the region.
Roosevelt emerged as the campaign's primary speaker and Hanna helped the cause working to settle a coal miners strike in Pennsylvania.
After the rebellion ended, the United States reaffirmed its commitment to the Open Door policy, which became the basis of American policy toward China.
Following the rout, the Union forces destroyed Confederate supplies and skirmished with the enemy again successfully.
McKinley quickly took to the soldier's life and wrote a series of letters to his hometown newspaper extolling the army and the Union cause.
McKinley later said the combat there was "as desperate as any witnessed during the war."
The next month, he increased the number of troops sent to the Philippines and granted the force's commander, Major General Wesley Merritt, the power to set up legal systems and raise taxes—necessities for a long occupation.
In February 1865, Crook was captured by Confederate raiders.
Delegations marched through the streets from the railroad station to McKinley's home on North Market Street.
The appointment aroused some controversy as McKenna's critics in the Senate said he was too closely associated with railroad interests and lacked the qualifications of a Supreme Court justice.
Although McKinley believed that the health of the nation depended on that of business, he was evenhanded in dealing with labor.
Both William and Ida McKinley placed their property in the hands of the fund's trustees (who included Hanna and Kohlsaat), and the supporters raised and contributed a substantial sum of money.
The 23rd was also in the thick of the fighting at Antietam, and McKinley himself came under heavy fire when bringing rations to the men on the line.
After studying there for less than a year, McKinley returned home and was admitted to the bar in Warren, Ohio, in March 1867.
Wyoming Senator Francis Warren wrote, "The politicians are making a hard fight against him, but if the masses could speak, McKinley is the choice of at least 75% of the entire body of Republican voters in the Union".
For most of McKinley's administration, George B. Cortelyou served as his personal secretary.
The Ohio Republican party remained divided, but McKinley quietly arranged for Foraker to nominate him at the 1891 state Republican convention, which chose McKinley by acclamation.
McKinley was the last president to have served in the American Civil War, beginning as a private in the Union Army and ending as a brevet major.
Wake Island, an uninhabited atoll between Hawaii and Guam, was claimed for the United States on July 12, 1898.
Along with his Supreme Court appointment, McKinley appointed six judges to the United States Courts of Appeals, and 28 judges to the United States district courts.
They soon resumed the offensive, marching into southwestern Virginia to destroy salt and lead mines used by the enemy.
McKinley tirelessly stumped his new district, reaching out to its 40,000 voters to explain that his tariff
