In the intensely fought 1896 and 1900 elections, he was defeated by William McKinley but retained control of the Democratic Party.
As chairman of the Nebraska Democratic Party, Dahlman would help carry Nebraska for Bryan in two presidential campaigns.
The Bourbon Democrats who supported incumbent Democratic President Grover Cleveland were defeated, and the party's agrarian and silver factions voted for Bryan, giving him the nomination of the Democratic Party.
In September 1914 Bryan wrote President Wilson urging mediation in the World War that had just begun in Europe, with the U.S. as the largest neutral:
The GOP invested ten times as much money into the campaign as did Bryan's Democratic Party.
Disappointed with the direction of their party, Gold Democrats invited Cleveland to run as a third-party candidate, but he declined.
Determined to put an end to this, Bryan, who had long served as a Presbyterian elder, decided to run for the position of Moderator of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the USA, which was at the time embroiled in the Fundamentalist-Modernist Controversy.
The Bible and McGuffey Readers shaped his views that gambling and liquor were evil and sinful.
In 1900, Truman, aged 16, was a page at the Democratic National Convention in Kansas City.
Bryan's participation in the highly publicized 1925 Scopes Trial served as a capstone to his career.
Even when Dahlman became closely associated with Omaha's vice elements, including the breweries, as the city's eight-term mayor, he and Bryan maintained a collegial relationship.
In the Democratic landslide of 1890, Bryan was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives from Nebraska's First Congressional District.
Mencken) as the trial assumes a national profile.
President Wilson appointed him Secretary of State in 1913.
Did not Bryan know, asked Darrow, that Chinese civilization had been traced back at least 7000 years?"
The Republicans nominated William McKinley on a platform calling for prosperity for everyone through industrial growth, high tariffs, and "sound money" (gold).
The popular political economist and social reformer Henry George influenced Bryan's thinking and campaigned on his behalf.
He served two terms as a member of the United States House of Representatives from Nebraska and was United States Secretary of State under President Woodrow Wilson (1913–1915).
In a typical day he gave four hour-long speeches and shorter talks that added up to six hours of speaking.
Bryan threw himself into the work of the Social Gospel.
Bryan tried to yoke the American credit to the Entente, saying "money is the worst of all contrabands because it commands everything else," but eventually yielded.
The William Jennings Bryan House in Nebraska was named a U.S. National Historic Landmark in 1963.
Stone claims that none of Bryan's ideas were original, and that he did not have the brains to be an effective president.
Bryan was worried that the theory of evolution was making grounds not only in the universities, but also within the church.
The Democrats nominated Bryan by a wide margin at the Democratic convention held in Denver and decided on John Kern, a politician from Indiana, as his running mate.
He also has a biographical part in "The 42nd Parallel" in John Dos Passos' ''USA Trilogy''.
At this point, William began spending his Sunday afternoons at the Cumberland Presbyterian Church.
The agreements, known officially as "Treaties for the Advancement of Peace," set up procedures for conciliation rather than for arbitration.
In Action Faithful.
In 1899 Bryan founded a weekly magazine, ''The Commoner'', calling on Democrats to dissolve the trusts, regulate the railroads more tightly, and support the Progressive Movement.
McKinley scored solid gains among the middle classes, factory and railroad workers, prosperous farmers, and the German Americans who rejected free silver.
Most leading Democratic newspapers rejected his candidacy.
He opposed a highly controversial resolution at the 1924 Democratic National Convention condemning the Ku Klux Klan, expecting the organization would soon fold.
In his three presidential bids, he promoted Free Silver in 1896, anti-imperialism in 1900, and trust-busting in 1908, calling on Democrats to fight the trusts (big corporations) and big banks, and embrace anti-elitist ideals of republicanism.
Despite Bryan's tremendous energy, McKinley and the Republicans were too strong to defeat.
A $4,000 scholarship for Creighton University students participating in Speech and Debate at the university is named after William Jennings Bryan.
He has been honored by the United States Postal Service with a $2 Great Americans series postage stamp.
Bryan campaigned tirelessly, championing the ideas of the farmers and workers, using his skills as a famed orator to ultimately reshape the Democratic Party into a more progressive one.
Republicans ridiculed Bryan as a Populist.
Bryan disliked the Klan but never publicly attacked it.
He gave speeches, organized meetings, and adopted resounding resolutions that eventually culminated in the founding of the American Bimetallic League, which then evolved into the National Bimetallic Union, and finally the National Silver Committee.
His party nominated Bourbon Democrat Alton B. Parker in 1904, who lost to Roosevelt.
He resigned because of his pacifist position on World War I. Bryan was a devout Presbyterian, a strong advocate of popular democracy, and an enemy of the banks and the gold standard.
Silas won election to the Illinois State Senate, but was defeated for re-election in 1860.
He also pointed out that by traveling on British vessels, which were at risk of attack, "an American citizen can, by putting his own business above his regard for this country, assume for his own advantage unnecessary risks and thus involve his country in international complications"  Wilson's demands from Germany for "strict accountability for any infringement of American rights, intentional or incidental" after the sinking of the ''Lusitania'' troubled Bryan, who counseled an “evenhanded policy.”  Bryan resigned in June 1915, protesting “… why be so shocked by the drowning of a few people, if there is to be no objection to starving a nation.”
For supporting Woodrow Wilson for the presidency in 1912, Bryan was appointed Secretary of State, the top cabinet position.
On one hand, Bryan was critical of militarism.
In Lincoln, Bryan met James Dahlman and they became lifelong friends.
Bryan argued that "universal peace cannot come until justice is enthroned throughout the world.
''Inherit the Wind'', a 1955 play by Jerome Lawrence and Robert Edwin Lee, is a highly fictionalized account of the Scopes Trial written in response to McCarthyism.
However, when the Bacon Resolution (a proposed supplement to the Treaty of Paris which would allow the Filipinos a “stable and independent government") failed to pass, Bryan began publicly speaking out against the Republicans's imperial aspirations.
At an average rate of 175 words a minute, he turned out 63,000 words a day, enough to fill 52 columns of a newspaper.
Bryan had an unusually high number of nicknames given to him in his lifetime; most of these were given by his loyal admirers in the Democratic Party.
Republicans discovered in August that Bryan was solidly ahead in the South and West, but far behind in the Northeast.
He was affected by James H. Leuba's major study, ''The Belief in God and Immortality, a Psychological, Anthropological and Statistical Study'' (1916).
A 1960 Hollywood film adaptation, written by the playwrights, was directed by Stanley Kramer and stars Spencer Tracy as lawyer Henry Drummond and Fredric March as his friend and rival Matthew Harrison Brady.
Bryan was one of the best known orators of his time.
He later left the Cumberland Presbyterian Church and joined the larger Presbyterian Church in the United States of America.
Bryan epitomized the prohibitionist viewpoint: Protestant and nativist, hostile to the corporation and the evils of urban civilization, devoted to personal regeneration and the social gospel, he sincerely believed that prohibition would contribute to the physical health and moral improvement of the individual, stimulate civic progress, and end the notorious abuses connected with the liquor traffic.
In addition to his best-known nickname, "The Great Commoner", he was also called "The Silver Knight of the West" (due to his support of the free silver issue) and the "Boy Orator of the Platte" (a reference to his oratorical skills and his home near the Platte River in Nebraska).
From 1904 to 1906, Bryan traveled globally, preaching, sightseeing with his wife Mary, lecturing, and all while escaping the political upheaval in Washington.
He mentions, at the beginning of the speech, that the United States should not try to emulate the imperialism of Great Britain and other European countries, who were in this period extending their power in Asia and Africa.
In this speech he discusses his views against the annexation of the Philippines, questioning the United States' right to overpower people of another country just to gain a military base.
Many of Bryan's supporters were opposed to what they perceived as Republican aspirations of turning the country into an imperial power and criticized Bryan for hypocritically supporting the ratification of the treaty.
Bryan justified supporting the treaty by arguing that the issue of imperialism should be decided upon by the American people at the ballot boxes and not in Congress.
In London in 1906, he presented a plan to the Inter-Parliamentary Peace Conference for arbitration of disputes that he hoped would avert warfare.
He calls Bryan one of the nation's worst Secretaries of State.
With his deep, commanding voice and wide travels, he was perhaps the best-known orator and lecturer of the era.
In contrast, Bryan was influenced by the social philosophy of Leo Tolstoy, Christian humanitarian and pacifist.
Bryan owned land in Nebraska and a  ranch in Texas; he paid for both with his strong earnings from speeches and ''The Commoner.''
They said Bryan was a madman, a religious fanatic surrounded by anarchists, who would wreck the economy.
Charles F. Wishart, president of the College of Wooster in Ohio, who had loudly endorsed the teaching of the theory of evolution in the college.
Bryan's hold on his party was weakened, while his erstwhile allies the Populists had virtually disappeared from the arena.
While he argued for the US to take on the role of a protectorate to the Philippines, the Republicans argued that annexation of the Philippines would eventually lead to independence.
In 1893, the repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act had resulted in the collapse of the silver market.
(Under Presbyterian church governance, clergy and laymen are equally represented in the General Assembly, and the post of Moderator is open to any member of the General Assembly.)
Bryan kept busy in 1913-1915, negotiating 28 treaties that promised arbitration of disputes before war broke out between the signatory countries and the United States.
His headstone reads, "Statesman.
Journalist H. L. Mencken, who disliked Bryan intensely, reportedly boasted to Darrow that "we killed the son of a bitch".
His most popular lecture (and his personal favorite) was "The Prince of Peace", which stressed that Christian theology was the solid foundation of morality, and individual and group morality was the foundation for peace and equality.
He tentatively called for nationalization of the railroads, then backtracked and called only for more regulation.
He was a fixture in the Democratic Party, and a hero to the common man.
In his famous Chautauqua lecture, "The Prince of Peace" (1909), Bryan warned that the theory of evolution could undermine the foundations of morality.
He made several attempts to negotiate a treaty with Germany, but ultimately could not succeed.
Wilson, however, did not allow the 57-year-old Bryan to rejoin the military, and did not offer him any wartime role.
On Sunday, July 26, 1925, he returned from Chattanooga, Tennessee to his home in Dayton.
One book Bryan read at this time convinced him that Darwinism emphasizing the struggle of races had undermined morality in Germany.
His "Cross of Gold" speech, delivered on July 9, 1896, instantly made him the sensational new face in the Democratic Party.
Later, in 1925, he moved to a new home further south in Coconut Grove on Main Highway called ''Marymont''.
Numbers says Bryan, "not only read the Mosaic "days" as geological "ages" but allowed for the possibility of organic evolution&mdash;so long as it did not impinge on the supernatural origin of Adam and Eve."
Omaha Bryan High School and Bryan Middle School in Bellevue, Nebraska are named for him.
Bryan gave a speech at the Democratic National Convention in 1900 simply titled "Imperialism."
Bryan held his base in the South, a one-party Democratic region where virtually only white men voted, since the effective disenfranchisement of most blacks at the turn of the century, but lost part of the West; McKinley retained the populous Northeast and Midwest and rolled up a comfortable margin of victory.
Yet Friend To Truth!
Bryan Medical Center (formerly BryanLGH Medical Center and Bryan Memorial Hospital) in Lincoln, Nebraska, Bryan College of Health Science, connected with the hospital in Lincoln, and Bryan College, located in Dayton, Tennessee, are also named for William Jennings Bryan.
Bryan actively lobbied for state laws banning public schools from teaching evolution.
Please enroll me as a private whenever I am needed and assign me to any work that I can do."
Bryan was the chief proponent of the Harrison Narcotics Tax Act, the precursor to the modern War on Drugs.
He heard Bryan speak and was deeply impressed.
If this is the law of our development then, if there is any logic that can bind the human mind, we shall turn backward to the beast in proportion as we substitute the law of love.
William Jennings Bryan was born in Salem, Illinois on March 19, 1860, to Silas Lillard Bryan and Mariah Elizabeth (Jennings) Bryan.
Second, he considered Darwinism as applied to society (Social Darwinism) to be a great evil force in the world, promoting hatred and conflicts, especially the World War, and inhibiting upward social and economic mobility of the poor and oppressed.
Bryan remained a staunch Democrat throughout his career."
In 2013, Bryan was inducted into the Gennett Records Walk of Fame to commemorate his recording of the Cross of Gold speech.
In the civil war in Mexico in 1914, Bryan supported American military intervention.
Because of his faith in the wisdom of the common people, he was called "The Great Commoner."
While Bryan declared “Imperialism to be the paramount issue,” he had difficulty differentiating his platform from that of the Republican party.
A bust of him was dedicated as part of the Hall of Fame in 1974 which currently resides, like other members of the hall of fame, in the Nebraska State Capitol.
Bryan linked Darwinism to what he considered to be the might-makes-right philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche.
:Bryan was the first leader of a major party to argue for permanently expanding the power of the federal government to serve the welfare of ordinary Americans from the working and middle classes....he did more than any other man--between the fall of Grover Cleveland and the election of Woodrow Wilson--to transform his party from a bulwark of laissez-faire to the citadel of liberalism we identify with Franklin D. Roosevelt and his ideological descendants.
Tom L. Johnson, the progressive mayor of Cleveland, Ohio, referred to Bryan's campaign in 1896 as "the first great struggle of the masses in our country against the privileged classes."
Another notable Bryan cartoon is one where he is standing atop a Bible, marketing the sales of a "crown of thorns" and a "cross of gold" both referencing "The Cross of Gold," his most popular speech.
Bryan also read ''The Science of Power'' (1918) by British social theorist Benjamin Kidd, which credited the philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche with German nationalism, materialism, and militarism.
Many colleges were still church-affiliated.
According to historian Ronald L. Numbers, Bryan was not nearly as much a fundamentalist as many modern-day creationists of the 21st century.
In this study, Leuba shows that during four years of college a considerable number of college students lost their faith.
To attend Whipple Academy, which was attached to Illinois College, Bryan was sent to Jacksonville, Illinois in 1874.
He asserts that Bryan only acted as a champion of common men in order to get their votes.
The actor Ainslie Pryor played Bryan in a 1956 episode of the CBS anthology series, ''You Are There'' which focuses on the Cross of Gold speech.
In his book ''They Also Ran'', Irving Stone criticizes Bryan as an egocentric who never admitted being wrong.
Instead he is more accurately described as a "day-age creationist".
Bryan refused to support the 1920 Democratic presidential nominee, James M. Cox, because he deemed Cox not dry enough.
:His one great flaw was to support, with a studied lack of reflection, the abusive system of Jim Crow – a view that was shared, until the late 1930s, by nearly every white Democrat....After Bryan's death in 1925, most intellectuals and activists on the broad left rejected the amalgam that had inspired him: a strict populist morality based on a close read reading of Scripture....Liberals and radicals from the age of FDR to the present have tended to scorn that credo as naïve and bigoted, a remnant of an era of white Protestant supremacy that has, or should have, passed.
A statue of Bryan represents the state of Nebraska at the National Statuary Hall in the United States Capitol.
He is opposed by a famous trial lawyer, Henry Drummond (based on Darrow), and mocked by a cynical newspaperman (based on H.L.
Until the right has triumphed in every land and love reigns in every heart, government must, as a last resort, appeal to force."
His home at Asheville, North Carolina from 1917 to 1920, the William Jennings Bryan House, was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1983.
In a 1934 speech dedicating a memorial to Bryan, President Franklin D. Roosevelt said "I think that we would choose the word 'sincerity' as fitting him Bryan most of all...it was that sincerity that served him so well in his life-long fight against sham and privilege and wrong.
Bryan lost to Wishart by a vote of 451-427.
He demanded "Free Silver" because he believed it undermined the evil "Money Power" and put more cash in the hands of the common people.
Bryan was named to the Nebraska Hall of Fame in 1971.
In 1920, Bryan told the World Brotherhood Congress that the theory of evolution was "the most paralyzing influence with which civilization has had to deal in the last century" and that Nietzsche, in carrying the theory of evolution to its logical conclusion, "promulgated a philosophy that condemned democracy,... denounced Christianity,... denied the existence of God, overturned all concepts of morality,... and endeavored to substitute the worship of the superhuman for the worship of Jehovah."
With the three nominations, voters from any party could vote for Bryan without crossing party lines.
However, he argued for the act's passage more as an international obligation than on moral grounds.
He contracted typhoid fever in Florida and stayed there to recuperate, never seeing combat.
Bryan opposed the Darwinian theory of evolution for two reasons.
Bryan embodied these fears of the Republican Party of the time, which is clearly evident in the lengths they went to deface his character in these cartoons.
Mary Bryan joined the Salem Baptists in 1872, so Bryan attended Methodist services on Sunday morning with his father, and in the afternoon, Baptist services with his mother.
Mary also became a lawyer, and collaborated with Bryan on all his speeches and writings.
In 1896, the Populists rejected Bryan's Democratic running mate, Maine banker Arthur Sewall, and named as his running mate Georgia Populist Thomas E. Watson.
He called his home on Brickell Avenue ''Villa Serena''.
Instead, the General Assembly announced disapproval of materialistic (as opposed to theistic) evolution.
The campaign kicked off in October 1921, when the Union Theological Seminary in Richmond, Virginia invited Bryan to deliver the James Sprunt Lectures.
He was a peace advocate, a supporter of Prohibition, and an opponent of Darwinism on religious and humanitarian grounds.
In the three-way race in the First Congressional District, Bryan received 6,713 more votes than his nearest opponent.
Bryan also appears as a character in Douglas Moore's 1956 opera ''The Ballad of Baby Doe'' and is briefly mentioned in John Steinbeck's ''East of Eden''.
Bryan is also remembered for his prophetic statement shortly after he became the Secretary of State in 1913: “I believe there will be no war while I am Secretary of State, and I believe there will be no war as long as I live.”
Salem is also home to Bryan Park and a large statue of Bryan.
Hence he became interested when its devotees in Nebraska viewed direct legislation as a means of obtaining anti-saloon laws.
He mostly spoke about Christianity, but covered a wide variety of topics.
At the time many farmers' groups believed that by increasing the amount of currency in circulation, commodities would receive higher prices.
For all his enormous influence in the Democratic Party, his two years as Secretary of State was the only time he served in a powerful office.
He was suspicious not only of the plutocracy but of the intelligentsia, ridiculing them as the "aristocracy of learning" and "the scientific soviet."
:Bryan in power was like Bryan out of power: he made the same well-meant gestures, showed the same willingness under stress or confusion to drop ideas he had once been committed to, the same inability to see things through.
In Stone's opinion, Bryan had one of the least disciplined minds of the 19th century, and McKinley, Roosevelt and Taft all made better Presidents than Bryan would have been.
Following high school, he entered Illinois College, graduating as valedictorian in 1881.
He practiced law in Jacksonville from 1883 to 1887, then moved to the boom city of Lincoln, Nebraska.
Bryan was elected, only the second Democrat to be elected to Congress in the history of Nebraska.
Ruth's eldest son John Bryan Leavitt, who had been adopted by his grandfather after his parents' divorce, became a poet and an actor, working professionally as John Bryan.
Partly to avoid Nebraska ethnics such as the German Americans who were "wet" and opposed to prohibition, Bryan moved to Coconut Grove in Miami, Florida in 1913.
That same year he became the first presidential candidate to campaign in a car (a donated Mueller) in Decatur, Illinois.
He believes that, as President, Bryan would have supported many blue laws.
A prominent example was the Butler Act of 1925, which made it unlawful in Tennessee to teach that mankind evolved from lower life forms.
People could vote for Bryan and Sewall (on the Democratic or Silver Republican lines), or for Bryan and Watson (on the People's Party line).
In his three presidential election bids, Bryan received a total of 493 electoral votes - the most of any candidate in American history who never won the presidency.
Bryan delivered speeches across the country for free silver from 1894 to 1896, building a grass-roots reputation as a powerful champion of the cause.
A strong believer in the power of government to improve people’s lives, Bryan expressed his belief to John Reed in 1916 that the government “may properly impose a minimum wage, regulate hours of labor, pass usury laws, and enforce inspection of food, sanitation and housing conditions.” Bryan became the bridge that brought different factions into the party, and paved the way for liberal Democrats such as Franklin D. Roosevelt with his New Deal legislation.
The legislatures of several Southern states proved more receptive to his anti-evolution message than the Presbyterian Church had been, and passed such laws after Bryan addressed them.
According to historian William Leuchtenburg, "few political figures exceeded the enthusiasm of William Jennings Bryan for the Spanish war."
In 1962, former President Harry Truman said Bryan "was a great one&mdash;one of the greatest."
In the days following the Scopes trial Bryan traveled hundreds of miles, delivering speeches in multiple towns.
"Asked when the Flood occurred, Bryan consulted ''Ussher's Bible Concordance'', and gave the date as 2348 B.C., or 4273 years ago.
A populist thrice-defeated Presidential candidate from Nebraska named Matthew Harrison Brady comes to a small town named Hillsboro in Tennessee to help prosecute a young teacher for teaching evolution to his schoolchildren.
Historian Richard Hofstadter comments:
Bryan College, a Christian-oriented institution, opened in 1930 in Dayton as a lasting memorial to Bryan.
Michael Kazin considers Bryan the first of the 20th century "celebrity politicians", better known for their personalities and communications skills than their political views.
Mencken, a prominent Bryan critic, was "The Fundamentalist Pope", a reference to Bryan's devout religious views.
He appeared to be ahead in the Midwest, so the Republicans concentrated their efforts there.
At the 1896 Democratic National Convention, Bryan lambasted Eastern moneyed classes for supporting the gold standard at the expense of the average worker.
He was survived by his daughter, Congresswoman Ruth Bryan Owen, and her four children: John Bryan Leavitt and Ruth Leavitt, by her first husband, Newport, Rhode Island artist William Homer Leavitt; and two children by her second husband, British Royal Engineers officer Reginald A. Owen.
With the outbreak of the Spanish–American War in 1898, Bryan was forced to consider his party's stance on foreign policy.
Following his defeat in the election of 1900, Bryan needed money, and his powerful voice and 100% name recognition were assets that could be capitalized.
As a minority member of the resolutions committee, Bryan was able to push the Democratic Party from its laissez-faire and small-government roots toward its modern, liberal character.
Fred Seely, inn manager and son-in-law of Edwin Wiley Grove, sponsored Bryan and other dignitaries.
By late September, the Republicans felt they were ahead in the decisive Midwest and began emphasizing that McKinley would bring prosperity to all Americans.
In 1900 Truman and his father "declared themselves thorough 'Bryan men'... Bryan remained an idol for Harry, as the voice of the common man."
Bryan ran against the Republicans and Theodore Roosevelt’s hand-picked nominee William Howard Taft.
With over 500 speeches in 1896, Bryan invented the national stumping tour in an era when other presidential candidates stayed home.
Kazin, however, also emphasizes the limits of Bryan's influence in the progressive mindset:
Bryan also formally received the nominations of the Populist Party and the Silver Republican Party.
It was that sincerity which made him a force for good in his own generation and kept alive many of the ancient faiths on which we are building today.
Bryan's speech to the students of Washington and Lee University began the Washington and Lee Mock Convention.
The Bryan Home Museum is a by-appointment only museum at his birthplace in Salem, Illinois.
The Florida boom collapsed within months after Bryan's death in 1925.
For Bryan, the Bible was absolutely central to answering this question, and moral responsibility and the spirit of brotherhood could rest only on belief in God.
He volunteered for duty and became colonel of a Nebraska militia regiment.
Bryan was very close to his brother and endorsed him for the vice presidency.
His promotions (in print, speeches and even radio talks) probably contributed to the Florida real estate boom of the 1920s.
In response, Bryan publicized the slogan, "Shall the People Rule?"
The developments of 19th century liberal theology, and higher criticism in particular, had allowed many clergymen to be willing to embrace the theory of evolution and claim that it was not contradictory with their being Christians.
