This area is the Willamette Floodplain, the largest remaining unplowed native grassland in the North Pacific geologic province, which encompasses most of the Pacific Northwest coast.
About 450 concrete flood-protection walls in Portland that had been constructed during the February flood, each weighing about , were removed in April.
Beginning at  above sea level, the main stem descends  between source and mouth, or about 2.3&nbsp;feet per mile (0.4&nbsp;m per km).
Flood deposits of silt and clay, ranging in thickness from  in the north to about  in the south, settled from this muddy water to form today's valley floor.
Built in 1913, it carries Oregon Route 34 (Corvallis–Lebanon Highway) over the river upstream of RM&nbsp;131 (RK&nbsp;211) in Corvallis.
The average discharge at the lowermost gauge, near the Morrison Bridge in Portland, was  between 1972 and 2013.
There were once many tribal villages along the lower river and in the area around its mouth on the Columbia.
At times, however, the Chinook territory extended even farther south in the Willamette Valley.
Linn City was abandoned.
The Ross Island Bridge carries U.S. Route&nbsp;26 (Mount Hood Highway) over the river at RM&nbsp;14 (RK&nbsp;23).
In the early 21st&nbsp;century, osprey populations are increasing along the river, possibly because of a ban on the pesticide DDT and on the birds' ability to use power poles for nesting.
Garter snakes are among the 15 species of reptiles found in the basin.
Beginning in the 1850s, steamboats began to ply the Willamette, despite the fact that they could not pass Willamette Falls.
In 1987, the U.S. Secretary of the Interior designated  of the watershed in Benton County as a National Natural Landmark.
Flood-control dams operated by the USACE are estimated to hold up to 27&nbsp;percent of the Willamette's runoff.
It was incorporated in 1844, becoming the first city west of the Rocky Mountains to have that distinction.
They are used to regulate river flows so as to cut peaks off floods and increase low flows in late summer and autumn, and to divert water into deeper, narrower channels to prevent flooding.
However, Native American languages in Oregon were very similar, so the name may also be derived from Kalapuya dialects.
A 1991 agreement between the City of Portland and the State of Oregon to dramatically reduce combined sewer overflows (CSOs) led to Portland's Big Pipe Project.
To enhance historical, natural, and recreational values along the river, the Oregon State Legislature established the Willamette Greenway program in 1967.
Throughout the 1940s the Willamette continued to flood its valley.
More than  of roads criss-cross the watershed.
Upstream on the Columbia River, water was also high and the city of The Dalles was nearly flooded.
In October, they were replaced by a larger steel wall that cost the city about $300,000.
The Willamette is nevertheless clean enough to be used by cities such as Corvallis and Wilsonville for drinking water.
Tilikum Crossing is a  cable-stayed bridge that carries public transit, bicycles, and pedestrians but no cars or trucks over the river.
In that time period, the Clackamas' tribal population was roughly 1,800.
Humans began living in the watershed over 10,000&nbsp;years ago.
The U.S. Forest Service manages 30&nbsp;percent of the watershed, the U.S. Bureau of Land Management 5&nbsp;percent, and the State of Oregon 1&nbsp;percent.
At Willamette Falls, between West Linn and Oregon City, the river plunges about .
From the 18th to the mid-19th&nbsp;century, much of the Pacific Northwest and most of its rivers were involved in the fur trade, in which fur trappers (mostly French-Canadians working for the Hudson's Bay Company and the North West Company, which later merged) hunted for beaver and sea otter on rivers, streams, and coastlines.
Basalts of the Columbia River Basalt Group, from eruptions in eastern Oregon, flowed across large parts of the northern half of the basin about 15&nbsp;million years ago.
Before dawn on December&nbsp;21, 1964, the Willamette reached , which was higher than the Portland seawall.
The pelts of these animals commanded substantial prices in either the United States, Canada or eastern Asia, because of their "thick, luxurious and water-repellent" qualities.
Elsewhere on the main stem, numerous minor flow-regulation structures force the river into a narrower and deeper channel to facilitate navigation and flood control.
In the 21st&nbsp;century, major highways follow the river, and roads cross it on more than 50 bridges.
Another historic structure, the Steel Bridge, further downstream, was "the largest telescoping bridge in the world at the time of its opening" in 1912.
His work helped open the port of Portland to commerce.
The citizens gathered what few possessions were not swept away by the floodwaters and moved out of town.
Oregon City prospered because of the paper mills that were run by the water power of Willamette Falls, but the falls formed an impassable barrier to river navigation.
The Chinook territory encompassed the lower Columbia River valley and significant stretches of the Pacific coast on both the north and the south side of the Columbia's mouth.
When small ships must pass under the bridge, its double vertical-lift span can raise a lower railway deck without disturbing traffic on the upper deck.
People of the south were more nomadic, traveling from place to place with the seasons.
The name ''Willamette'' is of indigenous origin, deriving from the French pronunciation of the name of a Clackamas Native American village.
Through it, state and local governments cooperated in creating or improving a system of parks, trails, and wildlife refuges along the river.
During the Pleistocene, beginning roughly 2.5&nbsp;million years ago, volcanic activity in the Cascades combined with a cool, moist climate to produce further heavy sedimentation across the basin; braided rivers created alluvial fans spreading down from the east.
It opened for general use on September 12, 2015, becoming the first new bridge built across the river in the Portland metropolitan area since 1973.
The Willamette River's water quality is rated excellent near the source, though it gradually declines to fair near the mouth.
Although products such as lumber were often transported on an existing network of railroads in Oregon, these advances in navigation helped businesses deliver more goods to Portland, feeding the city's growing economy.
Used for navigation purposes, these channels are managed by the U.S. federal government.
Elevations within the watershed range from  at Mount Jefferson in the Cascade Range to  at the mouth on the Columbia River.
The highest flow recorded at this station was  on February&nbsp;9, 1996, during the Willamette Valley Flood of 1996, and the minimum was  on July&nbsp;10, 1978.
In the following decades, many large dams were built on Cascade Range tributaries of the Willamette.
The indigenous peoples of the Willamette River practiced a variety of life ways.
Near its mouth north of downtown Portland, the river splits into two channels that flow around Sauvie Island.
Watersheds bordering the Willamette River basin are those of the Little Deschutes River to the southeast, the Deschutes River to the east, and the Sandy River to the northeast; the North Umpqua and Umpqua rivers to the south; coastal rivers including (from south to north) the Siuslaw, the Alsea, the Yaquina, the Siletz, the Nestucca, the Trask, and the Wilson to the west; the Nehalem and the Clatskanie to the northwest, and the Columbia River to the north.
They were known for the controlled burning of woodlands to create meadows for hunting and plant gathering (especially camas).
As of 2009, the basin contained 20 of the 25 most populous cities in Oregon.
In 1855, Joel Palmer, an Oregon legislator, negotiated a treaty with the Willamette Valley tribes, who, although unhappy with the treaty, ceded their lands to non-natives.
The Willamette River first appears in the records of outsiders in 1792, when it was seen by British Lieutenant William Robert Broughton of the Vancouver Expedition, led by George Vancouver.
The upper tributaries of the Willamette originate in the mountains south and southeast of Eugene, Oregon.
Between 1879 and 1885, the Willamette River was charted by Cleveland S. Rockwell, a topographical engineer and cartographer for the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey.
Sixty-four&nbsp;percent of the watershed is privately owned, while 36&nbsp;percent is publicly owned.
Rich with sediments deposited by flooding and fed by prolific rainfall on the western side of the Cascades, the Willamette Valley is one of the most fertile agricultural regions in North America, and was thus the destination of many 19th-century pioneers traveling west along the Oregon Trail.
Fur traders heavily exploited the Willamette River and its tributaries.
John McLoughlin, a Hudson's Bay Company (HBC) official, was one of the major contributors to the founding of the town in 1829.
The Willamette's main stem is  long, lying entirely in northwestern Oregon in the United States.
Operators can raise both decks as high as  above the water.
For the rest of its course, the river is extremely low-gradient and is affected by Pacific Ocean tidal effects from the Columbia.
The United States Exploring Expedition passed through the Willamette Valley in 1841 while traveling along the Siskiyou Trail.
Threatened, endangered, or sensitive species include spring Chinook salmon, winter steelhead, chum salmon, Coho salmon and Oregon chub.
The river below Willamette Falls,  from the mouth, is affected by semidiurnal tides, and gauges have detected reverse flows (backwards river flows) upstream from Ross Island at RM&nbsp;15 (RK&nbsp;24).
The river was an important transportation route in the 19th&nbsp;century, although Willamette Falls, just upstream from Portland, was a major barrier to boat traffic.
The '''Willamette River''' ( ) is a major tributary of the Columbia River, accounting for 12 to 15&nbsp;percent of the Columbia's flow.
Shortly after he was elected in 1966, Governor Tom McCall ordered water quality tests on the Willamette, conducted his own research on the water quality, and became head of the Oregon State Sanitary Authority.
The other 11 dams are Big Cliff on the North Santiam River; Green Peter and Foster on the Santiam River; Cougar on the South Fork McKenzie River;  Blue River on the Blue River; Fern Ridge on the Long Tom River; Hills Creek, Dexter on the Middle Fork Willamette River; Fall Creek on Fall Creek; Cottage Grove on the Coast Fork Willamette River, and Dorena on the Row River.
Further upstream, the pressing environmental issues have mainly been variations in pH and dissolved oxygen.
The river's two most significant course deviations occur at Newberg, where it turns sharply east, and about  downstream from Newberg, where it turns north again.
The largest is Portland, with more than 500,000 residents.
The adjacent park and neighborhood of Cathedral Park are named after the Gothic Cathedral-like appearance of the bridge towers.
The machinery to operate the swing span was removed in the 1950s.
Douglas fir, western hemlock, and western red cedar dominate the forest on the Coast Range side of the basin.
The dams are used primarily to produce hydroelectricity, to maintain reservoirs for recreation, and to prevent flooding.
Filling the Willamette basin to depths of  in the Portland region, each flood created a temporary lake, Lake Allison, that stretched from Lake Oswego to near Eugene.
The "Great Flood", as it is sometimes called, was massively destructive to human development because most of that development was located in the river's floodplain.
The locks at Willamette Falls were completed in 1873.
The Steel Bridge is "believed to be the world's only double-lift span that can raise its lower deck independently of the upper deck."
The Big Pipe project and related work reduces CSO volume on the lower river by about 94&nbsp;percent.
As a result, this section of the river was designated a Superfund site in 2000, involving the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in cleanup of the river bottom.
The territory of the Clackamas encompassed the northeastern portion of the basin, including the Clackamas River (with which their name is shared).
The northern part of the watershed is underlain by a network of faults capable of producing earthquakes at any time, and many small quakes have been recorded in the basin since the mid-19th&nbsp;century.
Among the 29 non-native species in the basin, there are brook, brown, and lake trout, largemouth and smallmouth bass, walleye, carp, bluegill, and others.
Levees were constructed along the river in most urban areas, and Portland built concrete walls to protect its downtown sector.
The initial cleanup is focused on the portion between Swan Island and Sauvie Island.
These figures are only speculative; there may have been as few as eight subgroups or as many as 16.
By this time, about 15 people had died as a result of the flooding and about 8,000&nbsp;Oregonians had been forced to evacuate their homes in search of other shelter.
Portland's main street was completely submerged, communication over the Cascades was cut off, and many rail lines were forced to shut down.
At about RM&nbsp;6 (RK&nbsp;10), it carries U.S. Route 30 Bypass.
Rockwell's survey was extremely detailed, including 17,782&nbsp;hydrographic soundings.
This and many other large flows preceded the Flood Control Act of 1936 and dam construction on the Willamette's major tributaries.
It carries trains on its lower deck, MAX (Metropolitan Area Express) light-rail trains and motorized vehicles on its upper deck, and foot and bicycle traffic on a cantilevered walkway attached to the lower deck.
It ends about  further downstream on the Columbia, near St. Helens in Columbia County.
At Salem (RM&nbsp;84, RK&nbsp;135), the score was 89, and good scores continued all the way to the Hawthorne Bridge in Portland (RM&nbsp;13, RK&nbsp;21) at 85.
Linn City (originally Robins Nest) was established across the Willamette from Oregon City.
Pollution is exacerbated by combined sewer overflows, which the city has greatly reduced through its Big Pipe Project.
Many of these emigrants followed the Oregon Trail, a  trail across western North America that began at Independence, Missouri, and ended at various locations near the mouth of the Willamette River.
By 1990 only 37&nbsp;percent of this zone was forested; the rest had been converted to farm fields or cleared for urban or suburban uses.
The DEQ considers index scores of less than 60 to be very poor; the other categories are 60–79 (poor); 80–84 (fair); 85–89 (good), and 90–100 (excellent).
The only dam on the Willamette's main stem is the Willamette Falls Dam, a low weir-type structure at Willamette Falls that diverts water into the headraces of the adjacent mills and a power plant.
In the 1960s, Oregon Governor Tom McCall led a push for stronger pollution controls on the Willamette.
In February 1996, very heavy warm rains driven by a subtropical jet stream fell on a high, water-heavy snowpack in the Willamette watershed.
Tribes of the northern Willamette Valley practiced a generally settled lifestyle.
The Izaak Walton League and the Oregon affiliate of the National Wildlife Federation countered the governor's veto with a ballot initiative, which passed in November 1938.
Between the 1850s and the 1960s, channel-straightening and flood control projects, as well as agricultural and urban encroachment, cut the length of the river between the McKenzie River confluence and Harrisburg by 65&nbsp;percent.
Marine deposits on top of older volcanics underlie the valley, which was initially part of the continental shelf, rather than a separate inland sea.
McLoughlin attempted to persuade the British government (which still held sway over the area) to allow American settlers to live on the land, and provided significant help to American colonization of the area, all against the HBC's orders.
Meanwhile, the Willamette continued to rise.
Since 1900, more than 15 large dams and many smaller ones have been built in the Willamette's drainage basin, and 13 of them are operated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE).
The Willamette continued to pose flooding threats through January 1965, and more stormy weather occurred along the Pacific Coast.
Flowing northward between the Oregon Coast Range and the Cascade Range, the river and its tributaries form the Willamette Valley, a basin that contains two-thirds of Oregon's population, including the state capital, Salem, and the state's largest city, Portland, which surrounds the Willamette's mouth at the Columbia.
Although the Willamette was, by mid-century, heavily engineered and controlled by a complex system of dams, channels, and barriers, it experienced severe floods through the end of the century.
In 1998, the Willamette became one of 14 rivers designated an American Heritage River by former U.S. President Bill Clinton.
The main channel, which is  deep and varies in width from  (although the river broadens to  in some of its lower reaches), enters the Columbia about  from the larger river's mouth on the Pacific Ocean.
Over the past 150 years, a significant change for the Willamette River has been the loss of its floodplain forests, which covered an estimated 89&nbsp;percent of a  band along each river bank in 1850.
Beaver and river otter are among 69 mammal species living in the watershed, also frequented by 154 bird species, such as the American dipper, osprey, and harlequin duck.
It carries Oregon Route 43 over the river at about RM&nbsp;26 (RK&nbsp;42) between Oregon City and West Linn.
Storms caused a major flood that swelled the Willamette and other rivers in the Pacific Northwest from December 1964 through January 1965, submerging nearly  of land.
Indigenous peoples of the Willamette Valley were further divided into groups including the Yamhill, Atfalati (Tualatin), Molala, Santiam, Chuchsney-Tufti, Muddy Creek, Long Tom, Yoncalla, Siuslaw, Calapooia, Chepenafa and Luckiamute, many of which were part of the larger Kalapuya group.
Beaver populations, presumed to be much lower than historic levels, are increasing throughout the basin.
Originally created by plate tectonics about 35&nbsp;million years ago and subsequently altered by volcanism and erosion, the river's drainage basin was significantly modified by the Missoula Floods at the end of the most recent ice age.
On December&nbsp;24, President Lyndon B. Johnson ordered federal aid for the flooded areas.
The central valley—a former perennial grass prairie interspersed with oaks, ponderosa pines, and other trees—is devoted almost entirely to farming.
Interstate 5 and three branches of Oregon Route 99 are the two major highways that follow the river for its entire length.
It caused $30&nbsp;million in damage, including harm to the Oregon State Capitol in Salem.
For at least 10,000&nbsp;years, a variety of indigenous peoples populated the Willamette Valley.
About 2.5&nbsp;million people lived in the Willamette River basin as of 2010, about 65&nbsp;percent of the population of Oregon.
The floods carried Montana icebergs well into the basin, where they melted and dropped glacial erratics on the land's surface.
It washed out five bridges in Lane County in December 1942, caused seven deaths in Portland and forced people in Eugene to evacuate in January 1943, caused minor flooding in Corvallis in November 1946, contributed to the destruction of Vanport City and the death of about 15 of its residents in May 1948, and nearly flooded parts of Salem in December 1948.
In 1894, another major flood occurred on the Willamette, and although it too caused huge damage, it was not as large as that of 1861.
Further downstream, the St. Johns Bridge, a steel suspension bridge built in 1931, replaced the last of the Willamette River ferries in Portland.
The 1861 flood peaked at —more than the Mississippi River usually discharges in the 21st&nbsp;century—and inundated some  of land.
The channel forms the primary navigational conduit for Portland's harbor and riverside industrial areas.
Further downstream is the oldest remaining highway structure over the Willamette, the Hawthorne Bridge, built in 1910.
By the late 1850s, farmers had begun to grow crops on most of the available fertile land.
An observer of the flood wrote, "The whole Willamette valley  was a sheet of water".
When the flood ended on December 14, only three homes remained standing in Linn City.
The Broadway Bridge, slightly downstream of the Steel Bridge, was the world's longest double-leaf bascule drawbridge at the time of its construction in 1913.
They were first led off their traditional lands to the Willamette Valley, but soon were marched to the Coast Indian Reservation.
He then discouraged tourism in the state and made it harder for companies to qualify for a permit to operate near the river.
Similarly, the river was shortened by 40&nbsp;percent in the stretch between Harrisburg and Albany.
The Chinooks lived in great wooden lodges, practiced slavery, and had a well-defined caste system.
Before being partly chipped away and removed, the largest of these originally weighed about .
Flooding returned in the winter of early 1890, when the river first rose very quickly and then fell very quickly.
It is the tallest bridge in Portland, with 408&nbsp;ft (122 m) tall towers and a 205&nbsp;ft (62 m) navigational clearance.
By the late 1930s, efforts to stem the pollution led to formation of a state sanitary board to oversee modest cleanup efforts.
The smaller Multnomah Channel, a distributary, is  long, about  wide, and  deep.
Although it is unclear exactly when, the territory of the Chinook once extended across the northern part of the watershed, through the Columbia River valley.
Communities along the main stem include Springfield and Eugene in Lane County; Harrisburg in Linn County; Corvallis in Benton County; Albany in Linn and Benton counties; Salem in Marion County; Newberg in Yamhill County; Oregon City, West Linn, Milwaukie, and Lake Oswego in Clackamas County; and Portland in Multnomah and Washington counties.
The initial trough-like configuration was created about 35&nbsp;million years ago as a forearc basin while the Pacific Plate subducted beneath the North American Plate.
The bill passed, but Governor Charles Martin vetoed it.
As a result, navigation on the Willamette River was divided into two stretches: the  lower stretch from Portland to Oregon City—which allowed connection with the rest of the Columbia River system—and the upper reach, which encompassed most of the Willamette's length.
These included the Kalapuya, the Chinook, and the Clackamas.
Although people had been traveling to Oregon since 1836, large-scale migration did not begin until 1843, when nearly 1,000 pioneers headed westward.
In addition to fish, the basin supports 18 species of amphibians, such as the Pacific giant salamander.
In the summer of 1866, the Willamette was measured at  above the "low water mark," and there were more flooding worries.
This flood destroyed the town of Linn City.
Those on the lower river, slightly closer to the coast, often relied on fishing as their primary economic mainstay.
The remaining forests close to the river include large stands of black cottonwood, Oregon ash, willow, and bigleaf maple.
In addition, a relatively small of amount of the water stored in the reservoirs is used for irrigation.
The expedition members noted extensive salmon fishing by natives at Willamette Falls, much like that at Celilo Falls on the Columbia River.
Most of them do not have fish ladders.
Part of the Willamette Floodplain was established as a National Natural Landmark in 1987 and the river was named as one of 14 American Heritage Rivers in 1998.
With development in and near the river came increased pollution.
Each flood produced "discharges that exceeded the annual discharge of all the present-day rivers of the world combined".
From Eugene to Portland, thousands of acres of rich riverside farmland were washed away and many towns in the valley were damaged or destroyed.
The new wall had  removable steel plates designed to better prevent future flooding.
The dams on the Willamette's major tributaries are primarily large flood-control, water storage, and power-generating dams.
Around the year 1850, the Kalapuya numbered between 2,000 and 3,000 and were distributed among several groups.
It is also the busiest bicycle and transit bridge in Oregon, with over 8,000 cyclists and 800 TriMet buses (carrying about 17,400 riders) daily.
They covered the Tualatin Mountains (West Hills), most of the Tualatin Valley, and the slopes of hills further south, with up to  of lava.
Between about 15,500 and 13,000&nbsp;years ago, the Missoula Floods—a series of large outpourings originating at Glacial Lake Missoula in Montana—swept down the Columbia River and backfilled the Willamette watershed.
The gradient is slightly steeper from the source to Albany than it is from Albany to Oregon City.
He also regulated how much those companies could pollute and closed plants that did not meet state pollution standards.
Starting in the 1820s, Oregon City developed near Willamette Falls.
The total native population was estimated at about 15,000.
It is one of 10 highway bridges crossing the river in Portland.
The Army Corps of Engineers operates 13 such dams, which affect flows from about 40&nbsp;percent of the basin.
Since pollution concerns are primarily along the lower river, the Willamette in general scores relatively high on the Oregon Water Quality Index (OWQI), which is compiled by the Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ).
Trade goods from the Columbia basin north of Portland could also be transported southward on the Willamette due to the deeper channels made at the Willamette's mouth.
In the central valley, several projects have been done to restore and protect wetlands in order to provide habitat for bald eagles, Fender's blue butterfly (of which 6,000 remain), Oregon chub, Bradshaw's desert parsley, a variety of Willamette fleabane, and Kincaid's lupine.
Skirmishes between natives and settlers in the Umpqua and Rogue valleys to the southwest of the Willamette River led the Oregon state government to remove the natives by military force.
Bounded by the Coast Range to the west and the Cascade Range to the east, the river basin is about  long and  wide.
In 1805, the Lewis and Clark Expedition traveled thousands of miles across central North America in an attempt to map and explore the Louisiana Territory of the United States and the Oregon Country, which were then occupied mainly by Native Americans and settlers from Great Britain.
It was only after receiving directions from natives along the Sandy River that the explorers learned about their oversight.
Significant tributaries from source to mouth include the Middle and Coast forks and the McKenzie, Long Tom, Marys, Calapooia, Santiam, Luckiamute, Yamhill, Molalla, Tualatin, and Clackamas rivers.
Other major dams in the Willamette watershed are owned by other interests; for example, several hydroelectric facilities on the Clackamas River are owned by Portland General Electric.
Over the next 25 years, some 500,000&nbsp;settlers traveled the Oregon Trail, braving the rapids of the Snake and Columbia Rivers to reach the Willamette Valley.
Today, the lock system is little used.
Fish in the Willamette basin include 31 native species, among them cutthroat, bull, and rainbow trout, several species of salmon, sucker, minnow, sculpin, and lamprey, as well as sturgeon, stickleback, and others.
By the early 20th&nbsp;century, major river-control projects had begun to take place.
