Penn hoped that an amendable constitution would accommodate dissent and new ideas and also allow meaningful societal change without resorting to violent uprisings or revolution.
Following Oliver Cromwell's death, however, the Crown was re-established and the King responded with harassment and persecution of all religions and sects other than Anglicanism.
Though impressed by Notre Dame and the Catholic ritual, he felt uncomfortable with it.
Later, he stated that what he really denied were the Catholic interpretations of this theological topic, and the use of unbiblical concepts to explain it.
The reign of King Charles had further tightened restrictions against all religious sects other than the Anglican Church, making the penalty for unauthorised worship imprisonment or deportation.
As a pacifist Quaker, Penn considered the problems of war and peace deeply.
Penn's father was often at sea.
As Penn became homeless, he began to live with Quaker families.
Penn returned home for the extraordinary splendor of the King's restoration ceremony and was a guest of honor alongside his father, who received a highly unusual royal salute for his services to the Crown.
Chigwell School, the school he attended, has named one of their four houses after him.
Internal political conflicts even threatened to undo the Pennsylvania charter.
As with the plague, the Penn family was spared.
In it, Penn exhorted believers to adhere to the spirit of Primitive Christianity.
Penn said the rumour had been "maliciously insinuated" by detractors who wanted to create a bad reputation to Quakers.
In return, one-fifth of all gold and silver mined in the province (which had virtually none) was to be remitted to the King and the Crown was freed of a debt to the Admiral of £16,000, equal to £ today.
* Hannah Penn (1671–1726)
* Margaret Penn (1704/05–1771)
Over twenty drafts, Penn laboured to create his "Framework of Government."
Ironically, the tolerant Penn transformed himself almost into a Puritan, in an attempt to control the fractiousness that had developed in his absence, tightening up some laws.
Sometime later, the institution was renamed the William Penn Charter School.
Penn stayed close to home but continued writing his tracts, espousing religious tolerance and railing against discriminatory laws.
The student body was a volatile mix of swashbuckling Cavaliers (aristocratic Anglicans), sober Puritans, and nonconforming Quakers.
Making matters worse from Penn's perspective, Philip Ford, his financial advisor, had cheated Penn out of thousands of pounds by concealing and diverting rents from Penn's Irish lands, claiming losses, then extracting loans from Penn to cover the shortfall.
During his second attempt to sell Pennsylvania back to the Crown in 1712, Penn suffered a stroke.
Penn bravely declared, "My prison shall be my grave before I will budge a jot: for I owe my conscience to no mortal man."
Penn became the sole proprietor of a huge tract of land west of New Jersey and north of Maryland (which belonged to Lord Baltimore), and gained sovereign rule of the territory with all rights and privileges (except the power to declare war).
Another change was found in Penn's writings, which had mostly lost their boldness and vision.
All this was a radical departure from the laws and the lawmaking of European monarchs and elites.
The "Five Mile Act" prohibited dissenting teachers and preachers to come within that distance of any borough.
Admiral Penn took part in the restoration of Charles II and was eventually knighted and served in the Royal Navy.
Remarkably, though the Crown reserved the right to override any law it wished, Penn's skillful stewardship did not provoke any government reaction while Penn remained in his province.
His eldest son William, Jr. was leading a dissolute life, neglecting his wife and two children, and running up gambling debts.
Though enraged, the Admiral tried his best to reason with his son but to no avail.
They refused to bow or take off their hats to social superiors, believing all men equal under God, a belief antithetical to an absolute monarchy which believed the monarch divinely appointed by God.
In an act which would not only secure his son's protection but also set the conditions for the founding of Pennsylvania, the Admiral wrote to the Duke of York, the successor to the throne.
"Penn Charter," a well-known secondary day school, is now the oldest Quaker school in the world.
A minor split developed in the Quaker community between those who favoured Penn's analytical formulations and those who preferred Fox's simple precepts.
The new king resolved the border dispute in Penn's favour.
After he sent letters to several landowners in Maryland advising the recipients that they were probably in Pennsylvania and not to pay any more taxes to Lord Baltimore, trouble arose between the two proprietors.
Among Penn's legacies was the unwillingness to force a Quaker majority upon Pennsylvania, allowing his state to develop into a successful "melting pot".
But the Admiral refused to let the opportunity pass and he paid the fine, releasing his son.
Swelling with pride, he had his portrait painted wearing a suit of armour, his most authentic likeness.
In 1669 Penn travelled to Ireland to deal with many of his father's estates.
This resulted in a "curse" which lasted from that year on until 2008, when a small statue of William Penn was put on top of the newly built Comcast Center.
The Admiral was severely distressed by his son's actions and took the conversion as a personal affront.
For his role in restoring the monarchy, Admiral Penn was knighted and gained a powerful position as Commissioner of the Navy.
So at age 18, young Penn was sent to Paris to get him out of view, improve his manners, and expose him to another culture.
The William Penn Society of Whittier College has existed since 1934 as a society on the college campus of Whittier College and continues to this day.
Many of Penn's legal and political innovations took root, however, as did the Quaker school in Philadelphia for which Penn issued two charters (1689 and 1701).
The Quakers were especially targeted and their meetings were deemed as criminal.
Whether from personal sympathy or political expediency, to Penn's surprise, the King granted an extraordinarily generous charter which made Penn the world's largest private (non-royal) landowner, with over .
Penn pleaded for his right to see a copy of the charges laid against him and the laws he had supposedly broken, but the judge, Thomas Howel, refused&nbsp;– even though this right was guaranteed by the law.
While Penn was abroad, the Great Fire of 1666 consumed central London.
In 1660 Penn arrived at Oxford and enrolled as a gentleman scholar with an assigned servant.
He found that he was not in sympathy with either his father's martial view of the world or his mother's society-oriented sensibilities, "I had no relations that inclined to so solitary and spiritual way; I was a child alone.
A chance re-meeting with Thomas Loe confirmed Penn's rising attraction to Quakerism.
William Penn died penniless in 1718, at his home in Ruscombe, near Twyford in Berkshire, and is buried in a grave next to his first wife in the cemetery of the Jordans Quaker meeting house near Chalfont St Giles in Buckinghamshire in England.
Under his direction, the city of Philadelphia was planned and developed.
Next, he set out to lay the legal framework for an ethical society where power was derived from the people, from "open discourse", in much the same way as a Quaker Meeting was run.
Their only American child, John, had been born and was thriving.
On 4 March 1681, the King signed the charter and the following day Penn jubilantly wrote, "It is a clear and just thing, and my God who has given it me through many difficulties, will, I believe, bless and make it the seed of a nation."
Penn first called the area "New Wales", then "Sylvania" (Latin for "forests" or "woods"), which King Charles II changed to "Pennsylvania" in honor of the elder Penn.
They also refused to swear oaths of loyalty to the King.
The official charge was publication without a license but the real crime was blasphemy, as signed in a warrant by King Charles II.
The Friends' School, Hobart has named one of their six-year seven classes after him.
He became a great friend of William Morris; a leading Quaker figure in Cork, and often stayed with Morris at Castle Salem near Rosscarbery.
In 1682 East Jersey was also purchased by Quakers.
In those years, he did put forward a plan to make a federation of all English colonies in America.
He wrote that the scourge "gave me a deep sense of the vanity of this World, of the Irreligiousness of the Religions in it."
Shops were full of imported merchandise, satisfying the wealthier citizens and proving America to be a viable market for English goods.
The land of Pennsylvania had belonged to the Duke of York, who acquiesced, but he retained New York and the area around New Castle and the Eastern portion of the Delmarva Peninsula.
Penn expressly confessed he believed in the Holy Three as well as in the divinity of Christ.
The Bishop of London ordered that Penn be held indefinitely until he publicly recanted his written statements.
Penn was educated first at Chigwell School, by private tutors whilst in Ireland, and later at Christ Church, Oxford.
With the New Jersey foothold in place, Penn pressed his case to extend the Quaker region.
Penn had grown weary of the politicking back in Pennsylvania and the restlessness with his governance, but Logan implored him not to forsake his colony, for fear that Pennsylvania might fall into the hands of an opportunist who would undo all the good that had been accomplished.
To attract settlers in large numbers, he wrote a glowing prospectus, considered honest and well-researched for the time, promising religious freedom as well as material advantage, which he marketed throughout Europe in various languages.
Penn did not always pay attention to details, and had not taken the fairly simple step of determining where the 40th degree of latitude (the southern boundary of his land under the charter) actually was.
Quakers were especially modern in their treatment of mental illness, decriminalising insanity and turning away from punishment and confinement.
Hamilton's success led to an established relationship of good will between the Penn family and Andrew Hamilton.
Within six months he had parcelled out  to over 250 prospective settlers, mostly rich London Quakers.
Though undetermined at the time, the Admiral had great hopes for his son's career under the favour of the King.
Children from poor families had to have a wealthy sponsor to get an education, as did Sir Isaac Newton.
Penn was commuting to Philadelphia on a six-man barge, which he admitted he prized above "all dead things".
A child given to musing, occasionally feeling the divine presence."
In desperation, Penn tried to sell Pennsylvania to the Crown before Bridget Ford got wind of his plan, but by insisting that the Crown uphold the civil liberties that had been achieved, he could not strike a deal.
The democratic principles that he set forth in the Pennsylvania Frame of Government served as an inspiration for the United States Constitution.
He also lambasted all "false prophets, tithemongers, and opposers of perfection".
His first experience of warfare gave him the sudden idea of pursuing a military career, but the fever of battle soon wore off after his father discouraged him, "I can say nothing but advise to sobriety...I wish your youthful desires mayn't outrun your discretion."
Penn received a hearty welcome upon his arrival and found his province much changed in the intervening 18 years.
In 1668 Penn was imprisoned in the Tower of London after writing a follow-up tract entitled ''The Sandy Foundation Shaken''.
Two years after Gulielma's death he married Hannah Margaret Callowhill (1671–1726), daughter of Thomas Callowhill and Anna (Hannah) Hollister.
The old man had gained respect for his son's integrity and courage and told him, "Let nothing in this world tempt you to wrong your conscience."
At age 62, Penn landed in debtors' prison; however, a rush of sympathy reduced Penn's punishment to house arrest, and Bridget Ford was finally denied her claim to Pennsylvania.
This agreement existed for almost 100 years until the city decided to allow skyscrapers taller to be built.
But he urged his father not to pay his fine and free him, "I intreat thee not to purchase my liberty."
Notably, as the sovereign, Penn thought it important to limit his own power as well.
There was no ritual and no professional clergy, and many Quakers disavowed the concept of original sin.
Besides achieving his religious goals, Penn had hoped that Pennsylvania would be a profitable venture for himself and his family.
Foot racing was Penn's favourite sport, and he would often run the more than three-mile (5&nbsp;km) distance from his home to the school.
From then on, Penn's religious views effectively exiled him from English society; he was sent down (expelled) from Christ Church, Oxford for being a Quaker, and was arrested several times.
Penn petitioned for an audience with the King, which was denied but which led to negotiations on his behalf by one of the royal chaplains.
Some Quakers had already moved to North America, but the New England Puritans, especially, were as hostile towards Quakers as Anglicans in England were, and some of the Quakers had been banished to the Caribbean.
After a failed mission to the Caribbean, Admiral Penn and his family were exiled to his lands in Ireland.
The times sprouted many new sects besides Quakers, including Seekers, Ranters, Antinomians, Seventh Day Baptists, Soul sleepers, Adamites, Diggers, Levellers, Anabaptists (such as Swiss and German Mennonites, etc.
But over-riding the differences was the fact that the persecution of Quakers had accelerated and Penn again resumed missionary work in Holland and Germany.
To avoid conflict, he withdrew from the fray and became a reclusive scholar.
He is therefore considered the very first thinker to suggest the creation of a European Parliament.
Penn withheld his political writings from publication as "The times are too rough for print."
However, Penn's Quaker government was not viewed favourably by the Dutch, Swedish, and English settlers in what is now Delaware.
A bronze statue of William Penn by Alexander Milne Calder exists on top of Philadelphia's City Hall.
Back at school, the administration imposed stricter religious requirements including daily chapel attendance and required dress.
The Duke and the King, in return for the Admiral's lifetime service to the Crown, promised to protect young Penn and make him a royal counselor.
Despite criticism by some Quaker friends that Penn was setting himself above them by taking on this powerful position, and by his enemies who thought he was a fraud and "falsest villain upon earth", Penn was ready to begin the "Holy Experiment".
Sprung from jail because of his family's rank rather than his argument, Penn was immediately recalled to London by his father.
Penn had plenty of time to spend with his family and still attend to affairs of state, though delegations and official visitors were frequent.
His tree plantings were providing the green urban spaces he had envisioned.
This case was one of the more important trials that shaped the concept of jury nullification and was a victory for the use of the writ of habeas corpus as a means of freeing those unlawfully detained.
Thomas weakened or eliminated the elected assembly's power, and ran the colony instead through his appointed governors.
Despite the dangers, Penn began to attend Quaker meetings near Cork.
After gaining his freedom, he finally married Gulielma Springett in April 1672, after a four-year engagement filled with frequent separations.
This led to an eighty-year legal dispute between the two families.
Penn's "Frame of Government" and his other ideas were later studied by Benjamin Franklin as well as the pamphleteer of the American Revolution, Thomas Paine, whose father was a Quaker.
Given writing materials in the hope that he would put on paper his retraction, Penn wrote another inflammatory treatise, ''No Cross, No Crown: A Discourse Shewing The Nature and Discipline of the Holy Cross of Christ and that the Denial of Self, and Daily Hearing of Christ's Cross, is the Alone Way to Rest and Kingdom of God.''
Also at this time, Penn was developing his individuality and philosophy of life.
A group of Quakers arranged for Ford to receive a payment for back rents and Penn was released.
Furthermore, the judge directed the jury to come to a verdict without hearing the defence.
Mrs. Ford took her case to court.
Penn travelled frequently with Fox, through Europe and England.
For its part, the Crown continued to confiscate Quaker property and put thousands of Quakers in jail.
In pleading his case, Penn stated that since the Quakers had no political agenda (unlike the Puritans) they should not be subject to laws that restricted political action by minority religions and other groups.
A man of extreme religious convictions, Penn wrote numerous works in which he exhorted believers to adhere to the spirit of Primitive Christianity.
Their neighbour was famed diarist Samuel Pepys, who was friendly at first but later secretly hostile to the Admiral, perhaps embittered in part by his failed seductions of both Penn's mother and sister Peggy.
They had eight children in twelve years.
The German Society of Pennsylvania was established in 1764 and is still functioning today from its headquarters in Philadelphia.
When new threats by France again put Penn's charter in jeopardy, Penn decided to return to England with his family, in 1701.
A second stroke several months later left him unable to speak or take care of himself.
Pepys thought it a "ridiculous nonsensical book" that he was "ashamed to read".
Penn supported James' Declaration of Indulgence which granted toleration to Quakers, and went on a "preaching tour through England to promote the King's Indulgence".
Having proved himself an influential scholar and theoretician, Penn now had to demonstrate the practical skills of a real estate promoter, city planner, and governor for his "Holy Experiment", the province of Pennsylvania.
), Behmenists, Muggletonians, and many others, as the Puritans were more tolerant than the monarchy had been.
Rational thought began to spread into science, politics and economics, which he did not take a liking to.
He had young Penn enroll in law school but soon his studies were interrupted.
Pennsylvania also became home for many Lutheran refugees from Catholic provinces (e.g., Salzburg), as well as for German Catholics who had also been discriminated against in their home country.
Penn rebelled against enforced worship and was expelled.
Penn's education heavily leaned on the classical authors and "no novelties or conceited modern writers" were allowed including William Shakespeare.
The Lord Mayor then told the jury, "You shall go together and bring in another verdict, or you shall starve", and not only had Penn sent to jail in Newgate Prison (on a charge of contempt of court for refusing to remove his hat), but the full jury followed him, and they were additionally fined the equivalent of a year's wages each.
William Penn married Hannah when she was 25 and he was 52.
In 1685 King Charles died and the Duke of York was crowned James II.
In 1681 King Charles II handed over a large piece of his American land holdings to William Penn to satisfy a debt the king owed to Penn's father.
There were considerable discussions about scrapping his constitution.
In addition to Penn's extensive political and religious treatises, he wrote nearly 1,000 maxims, full of wise observations about human nature and morality.
The William Penn High School for Girls was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1986.
Though later opposing Anglicanism on religious grounds, Penn absorbed many Puritan behaviours, and was known later for his serious demeanor, strict behavior and lack of humor.
He was released after 8 months of imprisonment.
The Penns lived comfortably at Pennsbury Manor and had all intentions of living out their life there.
His wife, however, did not enjoy life as a governor's wife and hostess, and preferred the simple life she led in England.
Penn had developed a taste for fine clothes, and for the rest of his life would pay somewhat more attention to his dress than most Quakers.
To his dismay, he found Bridewell and Newgate prisons filled with Quakers.
The Admiral also knew that after his death, young Penn would become more vulnerable in his pursuit of justice.
High literacy and open intellectual discourse led to Philadelphia becoming a leader in science and medicine.
However, William's son and successor, Thomas Penn, and his brother John, renounced their father's faith, and fought to restrict religious freedom (particularly for Roman Catholics and later Quakers).
His father's hopes that Penn's charisma and intelligence would win him favour at the court were crushed.
Penn then traveled to America and while there, he negotiated Pennsylvania's first land-purchase survey with the Lenape Indian tribe.
By adapting his mentor's belief in free will, Penn felt unburdened of Puritanical guilt and rigid beliefs, and was inspired to search out his own religious path.
The Admiral, despairing of the charges, pulled young Penn away from Oxford, hoping to distract him from the heretical influences of the university.
Penn's first of many pamphlets, ''Truth Exalted: To Princes, Priests and People'' (1668), was a criticism of all religious groups, except Quakers, which he perceived as the only true Christian group living at that time in England.
They had no 'historical' allegiance to Pennsylvania, so they almost immediately began petitioning for their own assembly.
Penn was born in 1644 at Tower Hill, London, the son of English Admiral Sir William Penn, and Margaret Jasper, from a Dutch family, previously the widow of a Dutch captain, and the daughter of a rich merchant from Rotterdam.
Other Pennsylvania Quakers were more outspoken and proactive, being among the earliest fighters against slavery in America, led by Daniel Pastorius, founder of Germantown, Pennsylvania.
* Richard Penn, Sr. (1705–1771)
Penn drafted a charter of liberties for the settlement creating a political utopia guaranteeing free and fair trial by jury, freedom of religion, freedom from unjust imprisonment and free elections.
Loe was admitted to the Penn household and during his discourses on the "Inner Light", young Penn recalled later that "the Lord visited me and gave me divine Impressions of Himself."
* Louis Penn (1707–1724)
'''William Penn''' ( (O.S.
The Philadelphia Phillies went on to win the 2008 World Series that year.
Urban designer Edmund Bacon was known to have said that no gentleman would build taller than the "brim of Billy Penn's hat".
The members of the jury, fighting their case from prison in what became known as Bushel's Case, managed to win the right for all English juries to be free from the control of judges.
When invited by the judge to reconsider their verdict and to select a new foreman, they refused and were sent to a cell over several nights to mull over their decision.
Instead he sought out spiritual direction from French Protestant theologian Moise Amyraut, who invited Penn to stay with him in Saumur for a year.
He also wrote a comprehensive, detailed explanation of Quakerism along with a testimony to the character of George Fox, in his introduction to the autobiographical ''Journal of George Fox''.
He slowly lost his memory.
Penn faced serious problems in the colonies due to his sloppy business practices.
When installed in 1894, the statue represented the highest point in the city, as City Hall was then the tallest building in Philadelphia.
Penn returned to England and immediately became embroiled in financial and family troubles.
The new government would have two houses, safeguard the rights of private property and free enterprise, and impose taxes fairly.
Penn had hoped to have William succeed him in America.
After Owen was censured again after being fired, students were threatened with punishment for associating with him.
It was unthinkable to have such a person govern a major colony, and in 1708 the Lord Chancellor ruled that "the equity of redemption still remained in William Penn and his heirs."
In addition, Thomas Jefferson and the founding Fathers adapted Penn's theory of an amendable constitution and his vision that "all Persons are equal under God" in forming the federal government following the American Revolution.
* Dennis Penn (1705/06–1721/22)
George Fox University, a Christian liberal arts university with Quaker heritage, began an Honors Program named after Penn in 2014.
Bidding goodbye to his wife and children, he reminded them to "avoid pride, avarice, and luxury".
The laws of behaviour he laid out were rather Puritanical: swearing, lying, and drunkenness were forbidden as well as "idle amusements" such as stage plays, gambling, revels, masques, cock-fighting, and bear-baiting.
Because of his father's high position and social status, young Penn was firmly a Cavalier but his sympathies lay with the persecuted Quakers.
Upon returning to England after two years abroad, he presented to his parents a mature, sophisticated, well-mannered, "modish" gentleman, though Samuel Pepys noted young Penn's "vanity of the French".
It is simply a Quaker man who slightly resembles William Penn.
The basic ceremony of Quakerism is silent meditation in a meeting house, conducted in a group.
The undogmatic Christian humanist talked of a tolerant, adapting view of religion which appealed to Penn, who later stated, "I never had any other religion in my life than what I felt."
Voltaire praised Pennsylvania as the only government in the world responsible to the people and respectful of minority rights.
