Article II of the Constitution states, "In case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death, resignation, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall devolve on the Vice President&nbsp;... and the Vice President shall act accordingly, until the disability be removed, or a President shall be elected".
Harrison wrote in a letter dated March 10, "I am so much harassed by the multitude that call upon me that I can give no proper attention to any business of my own."
The bill, , passed and the two new territories were established in 1800.
Harrison supervised the development of 13 treaties, through which the territory bought more than  of land from Indian leaders, including much of present-day southern Indiana.
Under the "Jefferson-Lemen compact", Jefferson donated money to Lemen to found churches in Illinois and Indiana to stop the proslavery movement.
Vice President Martin Van Buren, the Democratic candidate, was popular and deemed likely to win the election against an individual Whig candidate.
Harrison defeated the tribal forces at Prophetstown, next to the Wabash and Tippecanoe Rivers.
The Whig party unified behind a single candidate, and Harrison was chosen over more controversial members of the party, such as Clay and Webster.
Harrison rushed the process by offering large subsidies to the tribes and their leaders so that he could have the treaty in place before President Jefferson left office and the administration changed.
Due to the death of Harrison, three Presidents served within a single calendar year (Martin Van Buren, Harrison, Tyler).
His resignation was accepted in the summer of 1814.
Still in the army at the time, Harrison sold his land to his brother.
However, his troops had greatly outnumbered the attackers, and suffered many more casualties during the battle.
Harrison's doctors tried cures, applying opium, castor oil, leeches, and Virginia snakeweed, but the treatments only made Harrison worse, and he became delirious.
They immediately blocked his plans for slavery and repealed the indenturing laws he had passed in 1803.
A statue of Harrison was erected on Monument Circle in Indianapolis.
He had the shortest tenure of any president in history, and was the first president to die in office.
Van Buren, by contrast, was presented as a wealthy elitist.
Tecumseh informed Harrison that he had threatened to kill the chiefs who signed the treaty if they carried out its terms, and that his confederation of tribes was growing rapidly.
The first dispatch did not make clear which side had won the conflict, and the secretary at first interpreted it as a defeat.
Harrison ran in all the free states except Massachusetts, and the slave states of Delaware, Maryland, and Kentucky.
She also received the right to mail letters free of charge.
The Battle of the Thames was considered one of the great American victories in the war, second only to the Battle of New Orleans.
After the cabinet consulted with the Chief Justice Roger Taney, they decided that if Tyler took the presidential Oath of Office, he would assume the office of President.
The committee recommended splitting the territory into two segments, creating the Ohio Territory and the Indiana Territory.
He was of entirely English descent and his ancestors had all been in Virginia since the 1630s.
Harrison was hailed as a national hero and the battle became famous.
Harrison's only official act of consequence was to call Congress into a special session.
Governor Henry Lee III of Virginia, a friend of Harrison's father, learned of Harrison's situation after his father's death and persuaded him to join the army.
He was later buried in North Bend, Ohio.
Harrison had many friends in the elite eastern social circles, and quickly gained a reputation among them as a frontier leader.
In 1803, President Thomas Jefferson granted Harrison authority to negotiate and conclude treaties with the Indians.
This made it easier for the average settler to buy land in the Northwest Territory by allowing land to be sold in small tracts.
After the meeting, Tecumseh journeyed to meet with many of the tribes in the region, hoping to create a confederation to battle the United States.
In these early years, Harrison also earned money from his contributions to a biography written by James Hall, entitled ''A Memoir of the Public Services of William Henry Harrison'', published in 1836.
Harrison died on his 32nd day in office of complications from pneumonia, serving the shortest tenure in United States presidential history.
Once established, this precedent of presidential succession remained in effect until the Twenty-fifth Amendment was ratified in 1967.
After the American defeat in the Siege of Detroit, General James Winchester became the commander of the Army of the Northwest.
William's older brother, Carter Bassett Harrison, was elected to the United States House of Representatives from Virginia.
Daniel Webster ran in Massachusetts, and Willie P. Mangum in South Carolina.
Her family holds that Dilsia, a female slave belonging to William Henry Harrison, had six children by him, born into slavery.
He encouraged resistance by telling the tribes to pay white traders only half of what they owed and to give up all the white man's ways, including their clothing, muskets, and especially whiskey, which was becoming known as evil for American Indians.
They awaited him at all hours and filled the Executive Mansion.
Initially, he was greatly outnumbered by the British with their Indian allies.
* Harrison County, Ohio
The inaugural address was a detailed statement of the Whig agenda, essentially a repudiation of Jackson and Van Buren's policies.
Despite this, the dispute continued until the President's death.
Volume II of the Presidential Pez series was released in November 2012.
In response, Bolívar wrote, "The United States&nbsp;... seem destined by Providence to plague America with torments in the name of freedom", a sentiment that achieved fame in Latin America.
This strategy backfired when Harrison and his vice presidential running mate, John Tyler, adopted the log cabin and hard cider as campaign symbols.
Democrats cast Harrison as a provincial, out-of-touch old man who would rather "sit in his log cabin drinking hard cider" than attend to the administration of the country.
He promised to use patronage to create a qualified staff, not to enhance his own standing in government.
Two weeks later, at a farewell dinner for General Wayne, Symmes confronted his new son-in-law for the first time since the wedding, sternly demanding to know how Harrison intended to support a family.
They married at the North Bend home of Stephen Wood, Treasurer of the Northwest Territory.
His last words were to his doctor, but assumed to be directed at John Tyler, "Sir, I wish you to understand the true principles of the government.
Chief Winnemac, who was friendly to Harrison, countered Tecumseh's arguments and told the warriors that since they had come in peace, they should return home in peace.
Between 1836 and 1840, Harrison served as Clerk of Courts for Hamilton County.
There, he lived in relative retirement after nearly 40&nbsp;years of continuous government service.
A Whig chant from the time of the election exhibited the difference between candidates:
He rejected Tecumseh's claim that all the Indians formed one nation.
But Matt he has the golden plate, and he's a little squirt: wirt-wirt!
A Shawnee friendly to Harrison cocked his pistol from the sidelines to alert Harrison that Tecumseh's speech was leading to trouble.
William Henry Harrison was born on February 9, 1773, the youngest of Benjamin Harrison V and Elizabeth Bassett's seven children.
Clay attempted to influence Harrison's actions before and during his brief presidency, especially in putting forth his own preferences for Cabinet offices and other presidential appointments.
He called on Bolívar to encourage the development of a democracy.
In a biography of Walter Francis White, the African-American civil rights leader and president of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People in the mid-20th century, historian Kenneth Robert Janken notes that White's mother Madeline Harrison traced some of her mixed-race white ancestry to Harrison in Virginia.
On election day, Harrison won a landslide electoral college victory, though the popular vote was much closer, at 53% to 47%.
It was filmed near Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
The tribes living on the lands were furious and sought to have the treaty overturned, but were unsuccessful.
Harrison also served on the committee that decided how to divide the Northwest Territory.
The U.S. Congress had legislated a territorial land policy that led to high land costs, a policy disliked by many of the territory's residents.
He attended the school until 1790, becoming well-versed in Latin and basic French.
A few months later, the U.S. declared war against UK.
Three schools are named William Henry Harrison High School (in Evansville and West Lafayette, Indiana and Harrison, Ohio) in his honor.
''Tecumseh: The Last Warrior'' is a 1995 TNT Network movie about Tecumseh's life, based on the book ''Panther in the Sky'' written by James Alexander Thom and produced in part by Francis Ford Coppola.
Harrison also appears on the AMERIPEX presidential commemorative issues of 1986.
Harrison purchased from the Miami tribe, who claimed ownership of the land, more than 2,500,000&nbsp;acres (10,000&nbsp;km²) of land inhabited by Shawnee, Kickapoo, Wea, and Piankeshaw peoples.
When reporting to Secretary Eustis, Harrison informed him the battle occurred near the Tippecanoe River (which led to its naming), and he feared an imminent reprisal attack.
President James Madison removed Winchester and made Harrison the commander on September 17, 1812.
As delegate, Harrison successfully promoted the passage of the Harrison Land Act.
On February 19, 2009, the United States Mint released the ninth coin in the Presidential $1 Coin Program, bearing Harrison's likeness.
Although Harrison had come from a wealthy, slaveholding Virginia family, in this campaign he was promoted as a humble frontiersman in the style of the popular Andrew Jackson.
Numerous places were named after Harrison:
They used the images in banners and posters, and created bottles of hard cider that were shaped like log cabins, all to connect to the "common man".
In 1824, he was elected to the U.S. Senate, where he served until May 20, 1828.
The conflict became known as Tecumseh's War.
Henry Clay and he  had disagreed over the necessity of such a session, and when on March 11 Harrison's cabinet proved evenly divided, the president vetoed the idea.
The senior Harrison was governor of Virginia between 1781 and 1784, during and after the American Revolutionary War.
He served from March 4, 1799, to May 14, 1800.
Harrison's son John Scott Harrison served in the U.S. House of Representatives from Ohio between 1853 and 1857.
The North side of the pedestal states "Ohio's First President" and the South side has his name "William Henry Harrison".
A memorable example was the Gold Spoon Oration, delivered by a Whig representative.
In Indiana, the founding of an antislavery church led to citizens' signing a petition and organizing politically to defeat Harrison's efforts to legalize slavery.
They awarded Harrison a gold medal for his services during the War of 1812.
Eustis demanded to know why Harrison had not taken adequate precautions in fortifying his camp against attacks.
She nonetheless outlived William by 23 years, dying at age 88 on February 25, 1864.
In the winter of 1812–13, Harrison constructed a defensive position at the rapids on the Maumee River in northwest Ohio.
She was a daughter of Anna Tuthill and Judge John Cleves Symmes, a prominent figure in the state and former representative to the Congress of the Confederation.
Harrison's funeral took place in the Wesley Chapel in Cincinnati, Ohio, on April 7, 1841.
He was also the first president to die in office.
and an Ohio presidential elector in 1824 for Henry Clay.
When Harrison ran for Congress, he campaigned to work to alter the situation to encourage migration to the territory.
This was his job when he was elected president in 1840.
Jay Silverheels, best known for his role as Tonto in the popular television series, ''The Lone Ranger'', portrayed Harrison's adversary Tecumseh.
The original daguerreotype, made in Washington on his Inauguration Day, has been lost—although at least one early photographic copy exists in the archives of the Metropolitan Museum of Art., a payment of $25,000, one year of Harrison's salary.
In 1787, at the age of 14, Harrison entered the Presbyterian Hampden–Sydney College.
He championed for lower land prices, a primary concern of settlers in the Territory at the time.
The Democrats ridiculed Harrison by calling him "Granny Harrison, the petticoat general", because he resigned from the army before the War of 1812 ended.
In May, Congress convened.
The US Post Office released a 9-cent postage stamp issue honoring William Henry Harrison in 1938, Harrison would appear again on the 3-cent Indiana Territory Sesquicentennial commemorative stamp of 1950.
It provided more land for American purchase and settlement.
Tenskwatawa convinced the native tribes that they would be protected by the Great Spirit and no harm could befall them if they would rise up against the white settlers.
In 1811, while Tecumseh was traveling, Harrison was authorized by Secretary of War William Eustis to march against the nascent confederation as a show of force.
Harrison's grandson, Benjamin Harrison of Indiana, was the 23rd president, from 1889 to 1893, making them the only grandparent–grandchild pair of Presidents.
The dispute was the catalyst of a disagreement between Harrison and the Department of War that continued into the War of 1812.
Harrison is portrayed by David Clennon.
General "Mad Anthony" Wayne took command of the western army in 1792 following a disastrous defeat under its previous commander, Arthur St. Clair.
As governor, Harrison had wide-ranging powers in the new territory, including the authority to appoint all territorial officials, and the territorial legislature, and to control the division of the territory into political districts.
In 1803, Harrison lobbied Congress to repeal Article 6 of the Northwest Ordinance, to permit slavery in the Indiana Territory.
Having accumulated no substantial wealth during his lifetime, he subsisted on his savings, a small pension, and the income produced by his farm.
One of the children portraying Harrison boasts "I died in 30 days!"
Old Tip he wore a homespun coat, he had no ruffled shirt: wirt-wirt,
Harrison responded, "by my sword, and my own right arm, sir."
Harrison argued that the Great Spirit would have made all the tribes speak one language if they were to be one nation.
This is equivalent to $ today.
With the death of Garfield, Chester A. Arthur stepped into the presidency.
The authors base their findings on the president's symptoms and the close proximity of the White House to a dumping ground for sewage and human waste.
Although a slaveholder, he did not want slavery to expand into the Northwest Territory, as he believed the institution should end.
That year, Harrison had the appointed territorial legislature authorize indenturing.
Harrison and Tyler defeated Van Buren in the 1840 election.
Seeking to run a non-controversial and less ideological war hero who could defeat Van Buren based on popularity, a unified Whig Party nominated Harrison over party founder Henry Clay and fellow general Winfield Scott.
Harrison is one of nineteen US Presidents with no military vessel named after them.
I wish them carried out.
* Tipp City, Ohio (formerly Tippecanoe City)
The Indiana Territory consisted of the future states of Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, Wisconsin, and the eastern portion of Minnesota.
Harrison was the Northern Whig candidate for president in 1836, one of only two times in American history when a major political party intentionally ran more than one presidential candidate (the Democrats ran two candidates in 1860).
Tecumseh launched an "impassioned rebuttal", but Harrison was unable to understand his language.
* Harrison, New Jersey
As a general in the subsequent War of 1812, his most notable action was in the Battle of the Thames in 1813.
Harrison's doctor, Thomas Miller, diagnosed Harrison's cause of death as "pneumonia of the lower lobe of the right lung", but a 2014 medical analysis concluded that he instead died of enteric fever.
After a short period of debate in both houses, it passed a resolution that confirmed Tyler in the presidency for the remainder of Harrison's term.
Harrison took his pledge to reform executive appointments very seriously, visiting each of the six executive departments to observe its operations and issuing through Webster an order to all departments that electioneering by employees would henceforth be considered grounds for dismissal.
Harrison rebuffed his aggression, saying "Mr. Clay, you forget that '''I''' am the President."
The session was scheduled to begin on May 31.
Harrison then rode through the streets in the inaugural parade, and that evening attended three inaugural balls, including one at Carusi's Saloon entitled the "Tippecanoe" ball, which at a price of US$10 per person (equal to $ today) attracted 1000 guests.
He returned to the United States in June.
In a later address to the Hamilton County Agricultural Board in 1831, Harrison said he had sinned in making whiskey, and hoped that others would learn from his mistake and stop the production of liquors.
He argued that no one tribe could sell land without the approval of the other tribes; he asked Harrison to nullify it and warned that Americans should not attempt to settle the lands sold in the treaty.
After the death of his mother in 1793, Harrison inherited a portion of the family's estate, including about  of land and several slaves.
When a group arrived in his office on March 16 to demand the removal of all Democrats from any appointed office, Harrison proclaimed, "So help me God, I will resign my office before I can be guilty of such an iniquity!"
Congress suspended the article for 10 years, during which time the territories covered by the ordinance were granted the right to decide for themselves whether to permit slavery.
Together, the Harrisons had 10 children.
Returning to his farm in Ohio, Harrison lived in relative retirement until he was nominated for the presidency as one of several Whig Party candidates in the election of 1836.
He briefly attended a boys' academy in Southampton County.
He ran a successful horse-breeding enterprise that won him acclaim throughout the Northwest Territory.
After Harrison returned to the United States from Colombia, he settled on his farm in North Bend, Ohio, his adopted home state.
Harrison reported to the Secretary of State that the country was on the edge of anarchy and he thought Simón Bolívar was about to become a military dictator.
The new 27th Congress had convened an extraordinary session for the purpose of confirming Harrison's cabinet and other important nominees; since a number of them arrived after Congress' March 15 adjournment, however, John Tyler would ultimately be forced to renominate many of Harrison's selections.
The 1804 Treaty of St. Louis with Quashquame led to the surrender by the Sauk and Meskwaki of much of western Illinois and parts of Missouri.
Anna was frequently in poor health during the marriage, primarily due to her many pregnancies.
has been running since 1973 near Chillicothe Ohio at the Sugarloaf Mountain Amphitheatre.
He retired again to his farm.
It was the primary reason the Sauk sided with the United Kingdom during the War of 1812.
A few days later, however, Treasury Secretary Thomas Ewing reported to Harrison that federal funds were in such trouble that the government could not continue to operate until Congress' regularly scheduled session in December; Harrison thus relented, and on March 17 proclaimed the special session in the interests of "the condition of the revenue and finance of the country".
When the new administration of President Andrew Jackson took office in March 1829, Harrison was recalled so the new president could make his own appointment to the position.
It was one of the first brick structures in the territory.
Symmes did not come to accept Harrison until he had achieved fame on the battlefield .
In 1799, at age 26, Harrison defeated the son of Arthur St. Clair and was elected as the first delegate representing the Northwest Territory in the Sixth United States Congress.
The plan narrowly failed, as Van Buren won the election with 170 electoral votes.
The dispute intensified when Harrison named Daniel Webster, Clay's arch-rival, for control of the Whig Party, as his Secretary of State, and appeared to give Webster's supporters some highly coveted patronage positions.
As the warriors were dressed in war paint, their sudden appearance at first frightened the soldiers at Vincennes.
Nine lived into adulthood and one died in infancy.
Jefferson and Lemen were both instrumental in defeating Harrison's attempts in 1805 and 1807 to secure approval of slavery in the territory.
Without informing Harrison, President John Adams nominated him to become governor of the new territory, based on his ties to "the west" and seemingly neutral political stances.
With the aid of his close friend, Secretary of State Timothy Pickering, he was recommended to replace the outgoing Secretary of the Territory.
When Harrison came to Washington, he wanted to show both that he was still the steadfast hero of Tippecanoe, and that he was a better educated and thoughtful man than the backwoods caricature ascribed to him in the campaign.
In 1795 at the age of 22, Harrison met Anna Tuthill Symmes, of North Bend, Ohio.
His original interment was in the public vault of the Congressional Cemetery in Washington, D.C.
Tecumseh insisted that the Fort Wayne Treaty was illegitimate.
It was initially called Fort Harrison in 1892 after sitting President Benjamin Harrison but renamed in 1906 to reflect the name of the 9th President when it was found that another Army fort in Indianapolis was already named after the 23rd President.
It includes dispensers of the sixth through tenth U.S. Presidents: John Quincy Adams, Andrew Jackson, Martin Van Buren, William Henry Harrison, and John Tyler and one six-pack of candy.
Harrison was confirmed by the Senate the following day.
The episode centered around a visit to a fictionalized version of the William Henry Harrison Museum at Grouseland.
This was the site of an  encampment by Northwestern Army Commander General William Henry Harrison during the War of 1812.
When in 1809 the legislature was popularly elected for the first time, Harrison found himself at odds with them as the abolitionist party came to power.
* Harrison, Michigan
His death sparked a brief constitutional crisis, but its resolution left unsettled many questions following the presidential line of succession in regard to Constitution until the passage of the 25th Amendment in 1967.
However, Harrison died of pneumonia in April 1841, a month after taking office.
They were a prominent political family who lived on Berkeley Plantation in Charles City County, Virginia, where he was born.
Harrison served the shortest term of any American president: March 4&nbsp;– April 4, 1841, 30 days, 12 hours, and 30 minutes.
After the war ended, Congress investigated Harrison's resignation.
Harrison thought the Treaty of Grouseland in 1805 appeased some of the issues for Indians, but tensions remained high on the frontier.
He was the first United States president to die in office.
He said each tribe could have separate relations with the United States if they chose to.
* Harrison County, Indiana
That year, he made an unsuccessful run for the presidency as a Whig candidate.
Harrison was the Whig candidate (and again faced Van Buren, now the incumbent president) in the 1840 election.
Harrison was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives to finish the term of John McLean of Ohio, serving from October 8, 1816, to March 4, 1819.
Dwier Brown, best known for his role in the 1989 film ''Field of Dreams'', portrayed Harrison in "Tecumseh's Vision", episode 2 of the PBS documentary mini-series ''We Shall Remain'' released in 2009.
Both treaties were advantageous to the United States, as the tribes ceded a large tract of land in the west.
