Winds of this strength due to downsloped winds off terrain have been known to shatter windows and sandblast paint from cars.
At 70° S latitude on Neptune, a high-speed jet stream travels at a speed of .
It exists only in an atmosphere with horizontal temperature gradients.
Additionally, planets with hotter lower atmospheres could accelerate the loss rate of hydrogen.
Wind speed is measured by anemometers, most commonly using rotating cups or propellers.
While no species of tree is guaranteed to stand up to hurricane-force winds, those with shallow roots are more prone to uproot, and brittle trees such as eucalyptus, sea hibiscus, and avocado are more prone to damage.
These particles are able to escape the sun's gravity, in part because of the high temperature of the corona, but also because of high kinetic energy that particles gain through a process that is not well-understood.
The strongest westerly winds in the middle latitudes are within a band known as the Roaring Forties, between 40 and 50&nbsp;degrees latitude south of the equator.
Orographic precipitation occurs on the windward side of mountains and is caused by the rising air motion of a large-scale flow of moist air across the mountain ridge, also known as upslope flow, resulting in adiabatic cooling and condensation.
In mountainous areas, local distortion of the airflow becomes severe.
Wind powers the voyages of sailing ships across Earth's oceans.
Color coded maps are prepared for a particular area are described as, for example, "mean annual power density at 50&nbsp;meters."
When large-scale winds are calm, the strength of the sea breeze is directly proportional to the temperature difference between the land mass and the sea.
Wildfire intensity increases during daytime hours.
Unusual mechanisms of wind dispersal include tumbleweeds.
Wind can also cause plants damage through sand abrasion.
The polar easterlies, also known as Polar Hadley cells, are dry, cold prevailing winds that blow from the high-pressure areas of the polar highs at the north and south poles towards the low-pressure areas within the Westerlies at high latitudes.
They are useful for simplifying the atmospheric equations of motion and for making qualitative arguments about the horizontal and vertical distribution of winds.
The Shamal is caused by cold fronts lifting dust into the atmosphere for days at a time across the Persian Gulf states.
When the temperature onshore cools below the temperature offshore, the pressure over the water will be lower than that of the land, establishing a land breeze, as long as an onshore wind is not strong enough to oppose it.
The velocity of surface wind is generally the primary factor governing the direction of flight operations at an airport, and airfield runways are aligned to account for the common wind direction(s) of the local area.
Over long periods of time, the planetary wind can radically change the composition of planetary atmospheres.
In meteorology, winds are often referred to according to their strength, and the direction from which the wind is blowing.
To determine winds aloft, rawinsondes determine wind speed by GPS, radio navigation, or radar tracking of the probe.
Second, these suspended particles may impact on solid objects causing erosion by abrasion (ecological succession).
If the wind is blowing harder, it may produce howling sounds of varying frequencies.
Further insufficiencies, such as rotor blade friction and drag, gearbox losses, generator and converter losses, reduce the power delivered by a wind turbine.
Near the Earth's surface, friction causes the wind to be slower than it would be otherwise.
A new, controversial theory suggests atmospheric gradients are caused by forest induced water condensation resulting in a positive feedback cycle of forests drawing moist air from the coastline.
Within the tropics, thermal low circulations over terrain and high plateaus can drive monsoon circulations.
The furnaces were constructed on the path of the monsoon winds to exploit the wind power, to bring the temperatures inside up to .
Winds can shape landforms, via a variety of aeolian processes such as the formation of fertile soils, such as loess, and by erosion.
Cassini–Huygens data indicated peak easterly winds of .
To find the mass of the packet passing through an area ''A'' perpendicular its velocity (which could be the rotor area of a turbine), we multiply its volume after time ''t'' has passed with the air density ''ρ'', which gives us ''m'' = ''A'' ''v'' ''t'' ''ρ''.
Wind power is thus proportional to the third power of the wind velocity.
At the end of 2008, worldwide nameplate capacity of wind-powered generators was 120.8&nbsp;gigawatts.
At the cloud tops of Neptune, prevailing winds range in speed from  along the equator to  at the poles.
The larger the WPD calculation, the higher it is rated by class.
Ocean journeys by sailing ship can take many months, and a common hazard is becoming becalmed because of lack of wind, or being blown off course by severe storms or winds that do not allow progress in the desired direction.
Short bursts of high speed wind are termed gusts.
The stream of particles varies in temperature and speed with the passage of time.
In several countries it has achieved relatively high levels of penetration, accounting for approximately 19% of electricity production in Denmark, 10% in Spain and Portugal, and 7% in Germany and the Republic of Ireland in 2008.
During Napoleon's Egyptian Campaign, the French soldiers had a hard time with the khamsin wind: when the storm appeared "as a blood-stint in the distant sky", the natives went to take cover, while the French "did not react until it was too late, then choked and fainted in the blinding, suffocating walls of dust."
Over 50% of the African dust that reaches the United States affects Florida.
Other phenomena caused by the solar wind include geomagnetic storms that can knock out power grids on Earth, the aurorae such as the Northern Lights, and the plasma tails of comets that always point away from the sun.
Wind speeds as low as  can lead to power outages due to tree branches disrupting the flow of energy through power lines.
The United States reports winds over a 1&#8209;minute average for tropical cyclones, and a 2&#8209;minute average within weather observations.
Using the concept of stream tube, the maximal achievable extraction of wind power by a wind turbine is 59% of the total theoretical wind power (see: Betz' law).
These western ocean currents transport warm, sub tropical water polewards toward the polar regions.
The trade winds (also called trades) are the prevailing pattern of easterly surface winds found in the tropics towards the Earth's equator.
The thermal wind concept explains how differences in wind speed with height are dependent on horizontal temperature differences, and explains the existence of the jet stream.
The ageostrophic wind component is the difference between actual and geostrophic wind, which is responsible for air "filling up" cyclones over time.
On a rotating planet, air will also be deflected by the Coriolis effect, except exactly on the equator.
A related process to anemochory is anemophily, which is the process where pollen is distributed by wind.
Sustained wind speeds are reported globally at a  height and are averaged over a 10&#8209;minute time frame.
If there is a pass in the mountain range, winds will rush through the pass with considerable speed because of the Bernoulli principle that describes an inverse relationship between speed and pressure.
Total destruction to man-made structures occurs when winds reach .
Wind is caused by differences in the atmospheric pressure.
Large families of plants are pollinated in this manner, which is favored when individuals of the dominant plant species are spaced closely together.
He is said to be the ancestor (grandfather) of the winds of the eight directions.
There are two main effects.
In Poland, an example is the halny wiatr.
Saturn's winds are among the Solar System's fastest.
When landing, wind shear is also a hazard, particularly when the winds are strong.
The airflow can remain turbulent and erratic for some distance downwind into the flatter countryside.
Stribog is the name of the Slavic god of winds, sky and air.
Areas of wind shear caused by various weather phenomena can lead to dangerous situations for aircraft.
Wind dispersal of seeds, or anemochory, is one of the more primitive means of dispersal.
Such windblown sand causes extensive damage to plant seedlings because it ruptures plant cells, making them vulnerable to evaporation and drought.
On Jupiter, wind speeds of  are common in zonal jet streams.
These objects will produce sound if they touch each other.
The solar wind is quite different from a terrestrial wind, in that its origin is the sun, and it is composed of charged particles that have escaped the sun's atmosphere.
The study showed that the seedlings responded to the damage created by the windblown sand abrasion by shifting energy from stem and root growth to the growth and repair of the damaged stems.
These winds are warm and dry.
On coasts and isolated mountains, the tree line is often much lower than in corresponding altitudes inland and in larger, more complex mountain systems, because strong winds reduce tree growth.
Wind also affects the spread of wildfires.
It consists mostly of electrons and protons with energies of about 1 keV.
For example, burn rates of smoldering logs are up to five times greater during the day because of lower humidity, increased temperatures, and increased wind speeds.
Wind occurs on a range of scales, from thunderstorm flows lasting tens of minutes, to local breezes generated by heating of land surfaces and lasting a few hours, to global winds resulting from the difference in absorption of solar energy between the climate zones on Earth.
The sea is warmed by the sun more slowly because of water's greater specific heat compared to land.
The classic examples of these dispersal mechanisms include dandelions (''Taraxacum'' spp., Asteraceae), which have a feathery pappus attached to their seeds and can be dispersed long distances, and maples (''Acer (genus)'' spp., Sapindaceae), which have winged seeds and flutter to the ground.
An important constraint on wind dispersal is the need for abundant seed production to maximize the likelihood of a seed landing in a site suitable for germination.
Winds have various aspects, an important one being its velocity; another the density of the gas involved; another its energy content or wind energy.
If an offshore wind of  exists, the sea breeze is not likely to develop.
Aeolus, in varying interpretations the ruler or keeper of the four winds, has also been described as Astraeus, the god of dusk who fathered the four winds with Eos, goddess of dawn.
These prevailing winds blow from the west to the east, and steer extratropical cyclones in this general manner.
Once winds exceed , homes completely collapse, and significant damage is done to larger buildings.
As such, fine line patterns within weather radar imagery, associated with converging winds, are dominated by insect returns.
The hydrodynamic wind within the upper portion of a planet's atmosphere allows light chemical elements such as hydrogen to move up to the exobase, the lower limit of the exosphere, where the gases can then reach escape velocity, entering outer space without impacting other particles of gas.
Globally, the two major driving factors of large-scale wind patterns (the atmospheric circulation) are the differential heating between the equator and the poles (difference in absorption of solar energy leading to buoyancy forces) and the rotation of the planet.
The gradient wind is similar to the geostrophic wind but also includes centrifugal force (or centripetal acceleration).
As the temperature of the surface of the land rises, the land heats the air above it by conduction.
Australia's Barrow Island holds the record for the strongest wind gust, reaching 408&nbsp;km/h (253&nbsp;mph) during tropical cyclone Olivia on 10 April 1996, surpassing the previous record of 372&nbsp;km/h (231&nbsp;mph) set on Mount Washington (New Hampshire) on the afternoon of 12 April 1934.
Except for rotor ships using the Magnus effect, every sailing ship has a hull, rigging and at least one mast to hold up the sails that use the wind to power the ship.
It flows parallel to isobars and approximates the flow above the atmospheric boundary layer in the midlatitudes.
Total wind power could be captured only if the wind velocity is reduced to zero.
In outer space, solar wind is the movement of gases or charged particles from the Sun through space, while planetary wind is the outgassing of light chemical elements from a planet's atmosphere into space.
Since 1970, dust outbreaks have worsened because of periods of drought in Africa.
Dust events have been linked to a decline in the health of coral reefs across the Caribbean and Florida, primarily since the 1970s.
Its speed is , which is 3% of the speed of light.
There is a large variability in the dust transport to the Caribbean and Florida from year to year.
In areas where there is rugged topography that significantly interrupts the environmental wind flow, the wind circulation between mountains and valleys is the most important contributor to the prevailing winds.
The strongest observed winds on a planet in the Solar System occur on Neptune and Saturn.
Wind also limits tree growth.
Unlike the Westerlies, these prevailing winds blow from the east to the west, and are often weak and irregular.
If the wind gradient is significant or sudden, or both, and the pilot maintains the same pitch attitude, the indicated airspeed will increase, possibly exceeding the maximum ground launch tow speed.
Hills and valleys substantially distort the airflow by increasing friction between the atmosphere and landmass by acting as a physical block to the flow, deflecting the wind parallel to the range just upstream of the topography, which is known as a barrier jet.
When a difference in atmospheric pressure exists, air moves from the higher to the lower pressure area, resulting in winds of various speeds.
There are many different forms of sailing ships, but they all have certain basic things in common.
Especially on high buildings, many structural parts may be a cause of annoying noise at certain wind conditions.
Elk have a keen sense of smell that can detect potential upwind predators at a distance of .
In the coldest climates such as Antarctica, emperor penguins use huddling behavior to survive the wind and cold, continuously alternating the members on the outside of the assembled group, which reduces heat loss by 50%.
When wind gusts are at a similar frequency to the swaying of the bridge, the bridge can be destroyed more easily, such as what occurred with the Tacoma Narrows Bridge in 1940.
Jagged terrain combines to produce unpredictable flow patterns and turbulence, such as rotors, which can be topped by lenticular clouds.
Winds defined by an equilibrium of physical forces are used in the decomposition and analysis of wind profiles.
Using a mechanical sandblaster in a laboratory setting, scientists affiliated with the Agricultural Research Service studied the effects of windblown sand abrasion on cotton seedlings.
When these winds blow over open waters, they increase mixing of the upper layers of the ocean that elevates cool, nutrient rich waters to the surface, which leads to increased marine life.
Infrequent wind gusts can cause poorly designed suspension bridges to sway.
In Europe downwind of the Alps, they are known as foehn.
Similar to the solar wind, the planetary wind is composed of light gases that escape planetary atmospheres.
The Ancient Greeks also observed the seasonal change of the winds, as evidenced by the Tower of the Winds in Athens.
Vayu is the Hindu God of Wind.
Flying insects, a subset of arthropods, are swept along by the prevailing winds, while birds follow their own course taking advantage of wind conditions, in order to either fly or glide.
The blast wave is similar to a strong wind gust over the ground.
The largest nuclear explosion (50–58 megatons at an altitude of about ) generated a 20 bar blast pressure at ground zero, which is similar to a wind gust of .
In Java, the local name for such winds is koembang.
Made of six to twelve sails covered in reed matting or cloth material, these windmills were used to grind corn and draw up water, and were used in the gristmilling and sugarcane industries.
High winds scour away thin soils through erosion, as well as damage limbs and twigs.
According to legend, he was present at the creation of the world and first let the winds out of his bag to clear the world of mist.
In human civilization, wind has inspired mythology, influenced the events of history, expanded the range of transport and warfare, and provided a power source for mechanical work, electricity and recreation.
For example, a ''northerly'' wind blows from the north to the south.
Wind gradient can have a noticeable effect on ground launches, also known as winch launches or wire launches.
Although wind is not the primary form of seed dispersal in plants, it provides dispersal for a large percentage of the biomass of land plants.
This may be caused by the wind blowing over cavities, or by vortices created in the air downstream of an object.
Rather than air, the solar wind is a stream of charged particles—a plasma—ejected from the upper atmosphere of the sun at a rate of .
The pilot must adjust the airspeed to deal with the effect of the gradient.
A tailwind increases takeoff distance required and decreases the climb gradient.
The pilot must anticipate the wind gradient and use a higher approach speed to compensate for it.
Directly under the subtropical ridge are the doldrums, or horse latitudes, where winds are lighter.
This type of gas loss from a planet into space is known as planetary wind.
This causes a pressure gradient of about 2&nbsp;millibars from the ocean to the land.
The Sirocco brings dust from north Africa into southern Europe because of the movement of extratropical cyclones through the Mediterranean Sea.
Their cerci are very sensitive to the wind, and help them survive half of their attacks.
United States wildfire operations revolve around a 24-hour ''fire day'' that begins at 10:00&nbsp;a.m. because of the predictable increase in intensity resulting from the daytime warmth.
Wind erosion generally occurs in areas with little or no vegetation, often in areas where there is insufficient rainfall to support vegetation.
The geostrophic wind component is the result of the balance between Coriolis force and pressure gradient force.
Together with the trade winds, the westerlies enabled a round-trip trade route for sailing ships crossing the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, as the westerlies lead to the development of strong ocean currents on the western sides of oceans in both hemispheres through the process of western intensification.
In California, downsloped winds are funneled through mountain passes, which intensify their effect, and examples into Santa Ana and sundowner winds.
It is a calculation relating to the effective force of the wind at a particular location, frequently expressed in terms of the elevation above ground level over a period of time.
Although wind produced only about 1.5% of worldwide electricity use in 2009, it is growing rapidly, having doubled in the three years between 2005 and 2008.
A severe storm could lead to shipwreck, and the loss of all hands.
Because of the low sun angle, cold air builds up and subsides at the pole creating surface high-pressure areas, forcing an equatorward outflow of air; that outflow is deflected westward by the Coriolis effect.
Remote sensing techniques for wind include SODAR, Doppler lidars and radars, which can measure the Doppler shift of electromagnetic radiation scattered or reflected off suspended aerosols or molecules, and radiometers and radars can be used to measure the surface roughness of the ocean from space or airplanes.
The Saffir-Simpson scale and Enhanced Fujita scale were designed to help estimate wind speed from the damage caused by high winds related to tropical cyclones and tornadoes, and vice versa.
Winds can disperse seeds from various plants, enabling the survival and dispersal of those plant species, as well as flying insect populations.
Planets require large magnetic fields in order to reduce the ionization of their upper atmosphere by the solar wind.
While taking off with a tailwind may be necessary under certain circumstances, a headwind is generally desirable.
It generally occurs as a widespread blanket deposit that covers areas of hundreds of square kilometers and tens of meters thick.
Venti are the Roman gods of the winds.
In Norse mythology, Njörðr is the god of the wind.
This temperature change causes the daytime sea breeze to dissipate.
In coastal areas the sea breeze/land breeze cycle can define local winds; in areas that have variable terrain, mountain and valley breezes can dominate local winds.
This barrier jet can increase the low level wind by 45%.
In the Great Plains of the United States, the winds are known as a chinook.
Horizontal-axle windmills were later used extensively in Northwestern Europe to grind flour beginning in the 1180s, and many Dutch windmills still exist.
The solar wind creates the Heliosphere, a vast bubble in the interstellar medium surrounding the Solar System.
In Europe, similar winds are known as the Bora, Tramontane, and Mistral.
Wind speeds during downslope wind effect can exceed .
Westerly winds in the mid-latitudes of the planet drive the movement of ocean currents from west to east across the world's oceans.
Protestant Wind is a name for the storm that deterred the Spanish Armada from an invasion of England in 1588 where the wind played a pivotal role, or the favorable winds that enabled William of Orange to invade England in 1688.
The two main causes of large-scale atmospheric circulation are the differential heating between the equator and the poles, and the rotation of the planet (Coriolis effect).
The thermal wind is the ''difference'' in the geostrophic wind between two levels in the atmosphere.
So, we find that the total wind energy is:
Strong winds of intermediate duration (around one minute) are termed squalls.
Weather vanes pivot to indicate the direction of the wind.
They are strongest in the winter when the pressure is lower over the poles, and weakest during the summer and when pressures are higher over the poles.
The westerlies can be particularly strong, especially in the southern hemisphere, where there is less land in the middle latitudes to cause the flow pattern to amplify, which slows the winds down.
Ocean roughness can be used to estimate wind velocity close to the sea surface over oceans.
Long-duration winds have various names associated with their average strength, such as breeze, gale, storm, and hurricane.
Erosion can be the result of material movement by the wind.
'''Wind''' is the flow of gases on a large scale.
For instance, species in the Asteraceae on islands tended to have reduced dispersal capabilities (i.e., larger seed mass and smaller pappus) relative to the same species on the mainland.
When the poles of Mars are exposed to sunlight after their winter, the frozen CO2 sublimates, creating significant winds that sweep off the poles as fast as , which subsequently transports large amounts of dust and water vapor over its landscape.
The basic relation that the turbine power is (approximately) proportional to the third power of velocity remains.
The warm air is less dense than the surrounding environment and so it rises.
The fastest wind ever recorded is coming from the accretion disc of the IGR J17091-3624 black hole.
Loess tends to develop into highly rich soils.
There are also four dvärgar (Norse dwarves), named Norðri, Suðri, Austri and Vestri, and probably the four stags of Yggdrasil, personify the four winds, and parallel the four Greek wind gods.
In Central America, examples include the Papagayo wind, the Panama wind, and the Tehuano wind.
Cockroaches use slight winds that precede the attacks of potential predators, such as toads, to survive their encounters.
Reliance upon wind dispersal is common among many weedy or ruderal species.
During the North African Campaign of the World War II, "allied and German troops were several times forced to halt in mid-battle because of sandstorms caused by khamsin&nbsp;... Grains of sand whirled by the wind blinded the soldiers and created electrical disturbances that rendered compasses useless."
There are local names for winds associated with sand and dust storms.
In New Zealand, they are known as the Nor'west arch, and are accompanied by the cloud formation they are named after that has inspired artwork over the years.
Kamikaze (神風) is a Japanese word, usually translated as divine wind, believed to be a gift from the gods.
For aerodynamic aircraft which operate relative to the air, winds affect groundspeed, and in the case of lighter-than-air vehicles, wind may play a significant or solitary role in their movement and ground track.
Under appropriate climatic conditions, areas with loess are among the most agriculturally productive in the world.
Wind has a very important role in aiding plants and other immobile organisms in dispersal of seeds, spores, pollen, etc.
As described earlier, prevailing and local winds are not spread evenly across the earth, which means that wind speeds also differ by region.
The Westerlies play an important role in carrying the warm, equatorial waters and winds to the western coasts of continents, especially in the southern hemisphere because of its vast oceanic expanse.
