When properly stored, wines can maintain their quality and in some cases improve in aroma, flavor, and complexity as they age.
However, flavor differences are less desirable for producers of mass-market table wine or other cheaper wines, where consistency takes precedence.
In fine restaurants in Western countries, wine typically accompanies dinner.
The first known mention of grape-based wines in India is from the late 4th-century BC writings of Chanakya, the chief minister of Emperor Chandragupta Maurya.
However, wine-bottle manufacturers have been cited for Clean Air Act violations.
The ancient Romans planted vineyards near garrison towns so wine could be produced locally rather than shipped over long distances.
If a wine is not labeled with a country of origin or AVA the percentage requirement is lowered to 85%.
The earliest attested terms referring to wine are the Mycenaean Greek  ''me-tu-wo ne-wo'' (*), meaning "in (the month)" or "(festival) of the new wine", and  ''wo-no-wa-ti-si'', meaning "wine garden", written in Linear B inscriptions.
Wine had reached the Balkans by &nbsp;BC and was consumed and celebrated in ancient Greece, Thrace and Rome.
Many wineries use growing and production methods that preserve or accentuate the aroma and taste influences of their unique ''terroir''.
Commercial use of the term Meritage is allowed only via licensing agreements with the Meritage Association.
A wine expert and journalist who tastes and reviews wines for books and magazines
Some varieties can also exhibit a mineral flavor due to the presence of water-soluble salts as a result of limestone's presence in the vineyard's soil.
In medieval Europe, the Roman Catholic Church supported wine because the clergy required it for the Mass.
Wine contains ethyl alcohol, the same chemical that is present in beer and distilled spirits and as such, wine consumption has short-term psychological and physiological effects on the user.
Linear B also includes, inter alia, an ideogram for wine, i.e.
The commercial use of the English word "wine" (and its equivalent in other languages) is protected by law in many jurisdictions.
degrees in oenology and viticulture are available.
On Pesach (Passover) during the Seder, it is a Rabbinic obligation of adults to drink four cups of wine.
In ancient Egypt, six of 36 wine amphoras were found in the tomb of King Tutankhamun bearing the name "Kha'y", a royal chief vintner.
In his writings, Chanakya condemns the use of alcohol while chronicling the emperor and his court's frequent indulgence of a style of wine known as ''madhu''.
and spinning cones.
However, other fruits indigenous to the region, such as hawthorn, cannot be ruled out.
Thus, vintage wines are produced to be individually characteristic of the particular vintage and to serve as the flagship wines of the producer.
There are also wines made from fermenting other fruits or cereals, whose names often specify their base, with some having specific names.
Wine is an integral part of Jewish laws and traditions.
Cabernet Sauvignon, zinfandel, and Rhone varieties should be served at () and allowed to warm on the table to  for best aroma.
It was previously divided into two types: alcohol abuse and alcohol dependence.
Some wine labels suggest opening the bottle and letting the wine "breathe" for a couple of hours before serving, while others recommend drinking it immediately.
In the context of wine production, ''terroir'' is a concept that encompasses the varieties of grapes used, elevation and shape of the vineyard, type and chemistry of soil, climate and seasonal conditions, and the local yeast cultures.
Wine has long played an important role in religion.
slurred speech), staggering, dizziness and vomiting.
A BAC from 0.35% to 0.80% causes a coma (unconsciousness), life-threatening respiratory depression and possibly fatal alcohol poisoning.
Wine cellars, or wine rooms, if they are above-ground, are places designed specifically for the storage and aging of wine.
A specialist in the science of grapevines; a manager of vineyard pruning, irrigation, and pest control
Other beverages called "wine", such as barley wine and rice wine (e.g.
Wine can also be made from other species of grape or from hybrids, created by the genetic crossing of two species.
Methodist dentist and prohibitionist Thomas Bramwell Welch applied new pasteurization techniques to stop the natural fermentation process of grape juice.
Such wine fraudsters often profit by charging excessively high prices for off-vintage or lower-status wines from well-known wine regions, while claiming that they are offering a sound investment unaffected by economic cycles.
Brunello), are only made in better-than-average years.
Wines contain many chemical compounds similar or identical to those in fruits, vegetables, and spices.
Although red wine contains the chemical resveratrol and there is tentative evidence it may improve heart health, the evidence is unclear for those at high risk .
All these theories place the origin of the word in the same geographical location, Trans-Caucasia, that has been established based on archeological and biomolecular studies as the origin of viticulture.
In these latter cases, the term "wine" refers to the similarity in alcohol content rather than to the production process.
Some of these areas are now world-renowned for wine production.
Germany created a similar scheme in 2002, although it has not yet achieved the authority of the other countries' classification systems.
Note that this does not mean that wine is a symbol of blood, a common misconception that contributes to the Christian myth of the blood libel.
France has various appellation systems based on the concept of ''terroir'', with classifications ranging from ''Vin de Table'' ("table wine") at the bottom, through ''Vin de Pays'' and ''Appellation d'Origine Vin Délimité de Qualité Supérieure'' (AOVDQS), up to ''Appellation d'Origine Contrôlée'' (AOC) or similar, depending on the region.
Sonoma Valley), 95% of its volume must be from grapes harvested in that year.
The UK was the world's largest importer of wine in 2007.
Studies have also found that moderate consumption of other alcoholic beverages is correlated with decreased mortality from cardiovascular causes, although the association is stronger for wine.
A ''New York Times'' editorial suggested that box wine, being lighter in package weight, has a reduced carbon footprint from its distribution; however, box-wine plastics, even though possibly recyclable, can be more labor-intensive (and therefore expensive) to process than glass bottles.
Traces of wine have also been found in Iran with 7000-year-old wine jars and in Armenia, in the 6100-year old Areni-1 winery, the earliest known winery.
Additionally, some studies have found a greater correlation of health benefits with red than white wine, though other studies have found no difference.
The range of possible combinations of these factors can result in great differences among wines, influencing the fermentation, finishing, and aging processes as well.
Hybridization is different from grafting.
Sediment is more common in older bottles, but aeration may benefit younger wines.
Vintage wines are generally bottled in a single batch so that each bottle will have a similar taste.
The Georgian word goes back to Proto-Kartvelian *''ɣwino''-, which is generally believed to be a borrowing from Proto-Indo-European.
Different varieties of grapes and strains of yeasts produce different styles of wine.
Grapes ferment without the addition of sugars, acids, enzymes, water, or other nutrients, as yeast consumes the sugar in the grapes and converts it to ethanol and carbon dioxide.
Some well known example are hard cider from apples, perry from pears, pomegranate wine, and elderberry wine.
Fine restaurants and some private homes have wine cellars.
Experienced tasters can distinguish between flavors characteristic of a specific grape and flavors that result from other factors in winemaking.
The ideal temperature for serving a particular wine is a matter of debate by wine enthusiasts and sommeliers, but some broad guidelines have emerged that will generally enhance the experience of tasting certain common wines.
Although alternative closures are less expensive and prevent cork taint, they have been blamed for such problems as excessive reduction.
Wine is also drunk without the accompaniment of a meal in wine bars or with a selection of cheeses (at a wine and cheese party).
Five of these amphoras were designated as originating from the king's personal estate, with the sixth from the estate of the royal house of Aten.
Ultimate Indo-European origin of the word is the subject of continued debate.
While some Christians consider the use of wine from the grape as essential for the validity of the sacrament, many Protestants also allow (or require)  pasteurized grape juice as a substitute.
Some scholars have noted the similarities between the words for wine in Indo-European languages (e.g.
Risk is greater in younger people due to binge drinking which may result in violence or accidents.
Evidence includes two Phoenician shipwrecks from 750 BC discovered by Robert Ballard, whose cargo of wine was still intact.
Grafting is done in every wine-producing region in the world except in Argentina, the Canary Islands and Chile—the only places not yet exposed to the insect.
Many countries define legal appellations intended to define styles and qualities of wine; these typically restrict the geographical origin and permitted varieties of grapes, as well as other aspects of wine production.
Pottery jars from the Neolithic site of Jiahu, Henan, contained traces of tartaric acid and other organic compounds commonly found in wine.
sake), are made from starch-based materials and resemble beer  more than traditional  wine, while ginger wine is fortified with brandy.
Despite these general rules, breathing does not necessarily benefit all wines.
One recent study suggests that for the average wine drinker, the vintage year may not be as significant for perceived quality as had been thought, although wine connoisseurs continue to place great importance on it.
Sweet dessert wines may be served with the dessert course.
In addition, while a wine box is recyclable, its plastic bladder most likely is not.
The glass used to make bottles is a nontoxic, naturally occurring substance that is completely recyclable, whereas the plastics used for box-wine containers are typically much less environmentally friendly.
The spread of wine culture westwards was most probably due to the Phoenicians who spread outward from a base of city-states along the Lebanese, Syrian, and Israeli coasts.
The American Heart Association "cautions people NOT to start drinking ... if they do not already drink alcohol.
Wine is a popular and important beverage that accompanies and enhances a wide range of cuisines, from the simple and traditional stews to the most sophisticated and complex haute cuisines.
In a medical context, alcoholism is said to exist when two or more of the following conditions is present: a person drinks large amounts over a long time period, has difficulty cutting down, acquiring and drinking alcohol takes up a great deal of time, alcohol is strongly desired, usage results in not fulfilling responsibilities, usage results in social problems, usage results in health problems, usage results in risky situations, withdrawal occurs when stopping, and alcohol tolerance has occurred with use.
The ''Kiddush'' is a blessing recited over wine or grape juice to sanctify the Shabbat.
"It has been one of history's cruel ironies that the blood libel—accusations against Jews using the blood of murdered gentile children for the making of wine and matzot—became the false pretext for numerous pogroms.
In many Muslim countries, possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages carry legal penalties.
However, modern Hanafi scholars regard alcohol consumption as totally forbidden.
At a restaurant, patrons are helped to make good food-wine pairings by the restaurant's sommelier or wine waiter.
'''Wine''' (from Latin ''vinum'') is an alcoholic beverage made from fermented grapes, generally ''Vitis vinifera'' or its hybrids with ''Vitis labrusca'' or ''Vitis rupestris''.
On the other hand, Fähnrich considers *''ɣwino''- a native Kartvelian word derived from the verbal root *''ɣun''- ('to bend').
In addition to aeration, decanting with a filter allows the removal of bitter sediments that may have formed in the wine.
Grape skins naturally produce resveratrol in response to fungal infection, including exposure to yeast during fermentation.
Throughout history, wine has been consumed for its intoxicating effects, which are evident at normal serving sizes.
Wine has been produced for thousands of years.
Different concentrations of alcohol in the human body have different effects on a person.
When one of these varieties is used as the predominant grape (usually defined by law as minimums of 75% to 85%), the result is a "varietal" as opposed to a "blended" wine.
Some wine experts contend that the optimal temperature for aging wine is , others .
As the first great traders in wine (''cherem''), the Phoenicians seem to have protected it from oxidation with a layer of olive oil, followed by a seal of pinewood and resin, similar to retsina.
Examples of recognized non-European locales include Napa Valley, Santa Clara Valley and Sonoma Valley, Anderson Valley and Mendocino County in California, Willamette Valley and Rogue Valley in Oregon; Columbia Valley in Washington; Barossa Valley in South Australia and Hunter Valley in New South Wales; Luján de Cuyo in Argentina; Central Valley in Chile; Vale dos Vinhedos in Brazil; Hawke's Bay and Marlborough in New Zealand; and Okanagan Valley and Niagara Peninsula in Canada.
A wine expert who tastes wines to ascertain their quality and flavour
Spain, Greece and Italy have classifications based on a dual system of region of origin and product quality.
This is probably one of the main reasons why wine derived from grapes has historically been more prevalent by far than other types, and why specific types of fruit wine have generally been confined to regions in which the fruits were native or introduced for other reasons.
A 2003 report by archaeologists indicates a possibility that grapes were mixed with rice to produce mixed fermented beverages in China in the early years of the seventh millennium BC.
Many drinkers prefer to chill red wines that are already highly aromatic, like Chinon and Beaujolais.
A BAC from 0.25% to 0.40% causes stupor, unconsciousness, anterograde amnesia, vomiting, and death may occur due to inhalation of vomit (pulmonary aspiration) while unconscious and respiratory depression (potentially life-threatening).
Wine refrigerators are not ideal for aging, but rather serve to chill wine to the proper temperature for drinking.
Superior vintages from reputable producers and regions will often command much higher prices than their average ones.
However, this does not mean the temperature of the dining room—often around ()—but rather the coolest room in the house and, therefore, always slightly cooler than the dining room itself.
Blended wines are not considered inferior to varietal wines, rather they are a different style of winemaking; some of the world's most highly regarded wines, from regions like Bordeaux and the Rhone Valley, are blended from different grape varieties.
The sweetness of wine is determined by the amount of residual sugar in the wine after fermentation, relative to the acidity present in the wine.
Portugal has developed a system resembling that of France and, in fact, pioneered this concept in 1756 with a royal charter creating the Demarcated Douro Region and regulating the production and trade of wine.
Traces of wine have also been found in central Asian Xinjiang in modern-day China, dating from the second and first millennia BC.
Such producers try to minimize differences in sources of grapes through production techniques such as micro-oxygenation, tannin filtration, cross-flow filtration, thin-film evaporation,
"Banana" flavors (isoamyl acetate) are the product of yeast metabolism, as are spoilage aromas such as "medicinal" or "Band-Aid" (4-ethylphenol), "spicy" or "smoky" (4-ethylguaiacol), and rotten egg (hydrogen sulfide).
Natural wines may exhibit a broad range of alcohol content, from below 9% to above 16% ABV, with most wines being in the 12.5%–14.5% range.
A wine scientist or wine chemist; a student of oenology.
Armenian ''gini'', Latin ''vinum'', Ancient Greek οἶνος, Russian вино ), Kartvelian (e.g.
Wine is often served with dinner.
Both archaeological and genetic evidence suggest that the earliest production of wine may slightly predate this, with the earliest wine-making likely having taken place in Trans-Caucasia (including Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia), through the region between Eastern Turkey, and Northwest Iran.
Wine may be tasted as soon as the bottle is opened to determine how long it should be aerated, if at all.
Alcoholism also known as "alcohol use disorder"  is a broad term for any drinking of alcohol that results in problems.
Light red wines drunk young should also be brought to the table at this temperature, where they will quickly rise a few degrees.
Certain exceptions to the ban on alcohol apply.
Alcoholism reduces a person's life expectancy by around ten years and alcohol use is the third leading cause of early death in the United States.
In Greater Persia, ''mey'' (Persian wine) was a central theme of poetry for more than a thousand years, long before the advent of Islam.
The world's southernmost vineyards are in the Central Otago region of New Zealand's South Island near the 45th parallel south, and the northernmost are in Flen, Sweden, just north of the 59th parallel north.
The International Organisation of Vine and Wine requires that a "wine based drink" must contain a minimum of 75% wine, but producers do not have to divulge the nature of the remaining 25%.
Because wine is a natural, perishable food product, all types—including red, white, sparkling, and fortified—can spoil when exposed to heat, light, vibration or fluctuations in temperature and humidity.
Some blended wine names are marketing terms whose use is governed by trademark law rather than by specific wine laws.
For consistency, non-vintage wines can be blended from more than one vintage, which helps winemakers sustain a reliable market image and maintain sales even in bad years.
A BAC from 0.18% to 0.30% causes profound confusion, impaired speech (e.g.
There remains an ongoing debate between some American Protestant denominations as to whether wine can and should be used for the Eucharist or allowed as an ordinary beverage, with Catholics and some mainline Protestants allowing wine drinking in moderation, and some conservative Protestant groups opposing consumption of alcohol altogether.
Alcohol derived from a source other than the grape (or its byproducts) and the date is allowed in "very small quantities" (loosely defined as a quantity that does not cause intoxication) under the Sunni Hanafi ''madhab'', for specific purposes (such as medicines), where the goal is not intoxication.
In the United States, for a wine to be vintage-dated and labeled with a country of origin or American Viticultural Area (AVA) (e.g.
About 3.3 million deaths (5.9% of all deaths) are believed to be due to alcohol each year.
Red wines are generally perceived best when served ''chambré'' ("at room temperature").
Box wine can stay acceptably fresh for up to a month after opening because the bladder collapses as wine is dispensed, limiting contact with air and, thus, slowing the rate of oxidation.
Georgian ღვინო ), and Semitic (''*wayn''; Hebrew יין ), pointing to the possibility of a common origin of the word denoting "wine" in these language families.
Although lower quality evidence suggest a cardioprotective effect, no controlled studies have been completed on the effect of alcohol on the risk of developing heart disease or stroke.
, ''gini''; Ancient Greek:  ''oinos''; Aeolic Greek:  ''woinos''; Hittite: ''wiyana''; Lycian: ''oino'').
In the late 19th century, most of Europe's vineyards (excluding some of the driest in the south) were devastated by the infestation, leading to widespread vine deaths and eventual replanting.
A wine producer; a person who makes wine
Some vintage wines (e.g.
Typical intentional flavor elements in wine—chocolate, vanilla, or coffee—are those imparted by aging in oak casks rather than the grape itself.
Some Christians who were part of the growing temperance movement pressed for a switch from wine to grape juice, and the substitution spread quickly over much of the United States, as well as to other countries to a lesser degree.
Wines from other fruits, such as apples and berries, are usually named after the fruit from which they are produced combined with the word "wine" (for example, apple wine and elderberry wine) and are generically called fruit wine or country wine (not to be confused with the French term ''vin de pays'').
Investment in fine wine has attracted those who take advantage of their victims' relative ignorance of this wine market sector.
The use of wine in ancient Near Eastern and Ancient Egyptian religious ceremonies was common.
The English word "wine" comes from the Proto-Germanic ''*winam'', an early borrowing from the Latin ''vinum'', "wine" or "(grape) vine", itself derived from the Proto-Indo-European stem *''win-o-'' (cf.
Older wines generally fade (lose their character and flavor intensity) with extended aeration.
And due to the danger, those who live in a place where blood libels occur are halachically exempted from using red wine, lest it be seized as "evidence" against them."
See *''ɣwino''- for more.
Dry wine, for example, has only a small amount of residual sugar.
In an active wine cellar, temperature and humidity are maintained by a climate-control system.
Passive wine cellars are not climate-controlled, and so must be carefully located.
Pinot noir and Merlot).
esters and terpenes) that grape juice and wine can contain.
Drinking more than this amount; however, increases the risk of heart disease, high blood pressure, atrial fibrillation, and stroke.
Archaeological evidence has established the earliest known production of wine from fermented grapes during the late Neolithic site of Hajji Firuz in the northern Zagros Mountains or early Chalcolithic in the northern edge of the Middle East.
vinifera'' vines that have been grafted onto North American species' rootstock, a common practice due to their resistance to phylloxera, a root louse that eventually kills the vine.
As with all alcoholic beverages, drinking while driving, operating an aircraft or heavy machinery increases the risk of an accident; many countries have penalties against drunk driving.
In the Tabernacle and in the Temple in Jerusalem, the libation of wine was part of the sacrificial service.
Decanting (the act of pouring a wine into a special container just for breathing) is a controversial subject among wine enthusiasts.
Fortified wines (usually with brandy) may contain 20% alcohol or more.
Market recognition of particular regions has recently been leading to their increased prominence on non-European wine labels.
For example, Meritage (sounds like "heritage") is generally a Bordeaux-style blend of Cabernet Sauvignon and Merlot, but may also include Cabernet Franc, Petit Verdot, and Malbec.
Wine aroma comes from volatile compounds released into the air.
Regulations govern the classification and sale of wine in many regions of the world.
Drinking small quantities of alcohol (less than one drink in women and two in men) is associated with a ''decreased'' risk of heart disease, stroke, diabetes mellitus, and early death.
Individuals dining at home may use wine guides to help make food-wine pairings.
Wine tasting is the sensory examination and evaluation of wine.
Consult your doctor on the benefits and risks of consuming alcohol in moderation."
The earliest remains of Apadana Palace in Persepolis dating back to 515 BC include carvings demonstrating soldiers from Achaemenid Empire subject nations bringing gifts to the Achaemenid king, among them Armenians bringing their famous wine.
Wine was used in Eucharistic rites by all Protestant groups until an alternative arose in the late 19th century.
Red wine was associated with blood by the ancient Egyptians and was used by both the Greek cult of Dionysus and the Romans in their Bacchanalia; Judaism also incorporates it in the Kiddush and Christianity in the Eucharist.
If these beverages, which seem to be the precursors of rice wine, included grapes rather than other fruits, they would have been any of the several dozen indigenous wild species in China, rather than ''Vitis vinifera'', which was introduced there 6000 years later.
labrusca'' (of which the Concord grape is a cultivar), ''V.
riparia'' are native North American grapes usually grown to eat fresh or for grape juice, jam, or jelly, and only occasionally made into wine.
The earliest known evidence of wine comes from Georgia (Caucasus), where 8000-year-old wine jars were found.
Vaporization of these compounds can be accelerated by twirling the wine glass or serving at room temperature.
Climate's impact on the character of a wine can be significant enough to cause different vintages from the same vineyard to vary dramatically in flavor and quality.
Some wines are packaged in thick plastic bags within corrugated fiberboard boxes, and are called "box wines", or "cask wine".
Wine refrigerators offer a smaller alternative to wine cellars and are available in capacities ranging from small, 16-bottle units to furniture-quality pieces that can contain 400 bottles.
Other than the grape varieties traditionally used for winemaking, most fruits naturally lack either sufficient fermentable sugars, relatively low acidity, yeast nutrients needed to promote or maintain fermentation, or a combination of these three characteristics.
White wine generally contains lower levels of the chemical as it has minimal contact with grape skins during this process.
The earliest evidence of a wine production facility is the Areni-1 winery in Armenia and is at least 6100 years old; presumably, wine had started being produced much earlier.
The Romans discovered that burning sulfur candles inside empty wine vessels kept them fresh and free from a vinegar smell.
These refrigerators keep the humidity low (usually under 50%), below the optimal humidity of 50% to 70%.
In contrast, bottled wine oxidizes more rapidly after opening because of the increasing ratio of air to wine as the contents are dispensed; it can degrade considerably in a few days.
While some types of alcohol are sometimes stored in freezer, such as vodka, it is not possible to safely freeze wine in the bottle, as there is insufficient room for it to expand as it freezes and the bottle will usually crack.
Wine is important in cuisine not just for its value as a beverage, but as a flavor agent, primarily in stocks and braising, since its acidity lends balance to rich savory or sweet dishes.
Some Alevi sects–one of the two main branches of Islam in Turkey (the other being Sunni Islam)–use wine in their religious services.
Literary references to wine are abundant in Homer (8th century BC, but possibly relating earlier compositions), Alkman (7th century BC), and others.
Most wines are sold in glass bottles and sealed with corks (50% of which come from Portugal).
Wine is usually made from one or more varieties of the European species ''Vitis vinifera'', such as Pinot noir, Chardonnay, Cabernet Sauvignon, Gamay and Merlot.
The wines of Byblos were exported to Egypt during the Old Kingdom and then throughout the Mediterranean.
Wine sauce is an example of a culinary sauce that uses wine as a primary ingredient.
