These can also destem at the same time.
'''Cold stabilization''' is a process used in winemaking to reduce tartrate crystals (generally potassium bitartrate) in wine.
This is a bacterial process which converts "crisp, green apple" malic acid to "soft, creamy" lactic acid softening the taste of the wine.
The decision to harvest grapes is typically made by the winemaker and informed by the level of sugar (called °Brix), acid (TA or Titratable Acidity as expressed by tartaric acid equivalents) and pH of the grapes.
Frequently wild ferments lead to the production of unpleasant acetic acid (vinegar) production as a by product.
Amateur winemakers often use glass carboys in the production of their wine; these vessels (sometimes called ''demijohns'') have a capacity of .
In commercial winemaking, chaptalization is subject to local regulations.
Potassium sorbate is effective for the control of fungal growth, including yeast, especially for sweet wines in bottle.
To make certain types of wine, grapes are put through a crusher and then poured into open fermentation tanks.
Grape quality is affected by variety as well as weather during the growing season, soil minerals and acidity, time of harvest, and pruning method.
The combination of these effects is often referred to as the grape's ''terroir''.
It simply means that a significant amount of yeast and bacteria has been removed to a harmless level for the wine stability.
The winemaker can correct perceived inadequacies by mixing wines from different grapes and batches that were produced under different conditions.
Unoaked wine is fermented in a barrel made of stainless steel or other material having no influence in the final taste of the wine.
Grapes are usually harvested from the vineyard from early September until early November in the northern hemisphere, and mid February until early March in the southern hemisphere.
The wine must be settled or clarified and adjustments made prior to bottling.
In the United States mechanical harvesting is seldom used for premium winemaking because of the indiscriminate picking and increased oxidation of the grape juice.
After a period in which the wine stands or ages, the wine is separated from the dead yeast and any solids that remained (called lees), and transferred to a new container where any additional fermentation may take place.
Available sulfur dioxide should be maintained at this level until bottling.
To start primary fermentation yeast may be added to the must for red wine or may occur naturally as ambient yeast on the grapes or in the air.
Pressing is not always a necessary act in winemaking; if grapes are crushed there is a considerable amount of juice immediately liberated (called free-run juice) that can be used for vinification.
In microbial stabilization, organisms that affect the stability of the wine are removed therefore reducing the likelihood of re-fermentation or spoilage.
For red winemaking, stems of the grapes are usually removed before fermentation since the stems have a relatively high tannin content; in addition to tannin they can also give the wine a vegetal aroma (due to extraction of 2-methoxy-3-isopropylpyrazine which has an aroma reminiscent of green bell peppers.)
These tests may be performed throughout the making of the wine as well as prior to bottling.
A person who makes wine is traditionally called a winemaker or ''vintner''.
A disadvantage of mechanical harvesting is the indiscriminate inclusion of foreign non-grape material in the product, especially leaf stems and leaves, but also, depending on the trellis system and grapevine canopy management, may include moldy grapes,canes, metal debris, rocks and even small animals and bird nests.
Similarly in fortified wines, such as port wine, high proof neutral grape spirit (brandy) is added to arrest the ferment and adjust the alcohol content when the desired sugar level has been reached.
With sparkling wines such as Champagne, an additional, "secondary" fermentation takes place inside the bottle, dissolving trapped carbon dioxide in the wine and creating the characteristic bubbles.
eliminating (removing) or killing (deactivating) of all forms of life and other biological agents.
However, only about 10% of all red and 5% of white wine will taste better after five years than it will after just one year.
However, filtration at this level may lighten a wine's color and body.
Sometimes a partial fermentation, for example, somewhere less than 50% might be employed.
As the skins are the source of the tannins, the cap needs to be mixed through the liquid each day, or "punched," which traditionally is done by stomping through the vat.
Mainly present is acetic acid (the dominant component of vinegar), but lactic, butyric, propionic, and formic acid can also be found.
There are several methods available; a typical test involves acidification of a sample with phosphoric acid, distillation of the liberated SO2, and capture by hydrogen peroxide solution.
Mead is a wine that is made with honey being the primary ingredient after water.
Malolactic fermentation usually results in a reduction in the amount of total acidity of the wine.
This can be done by chilling the wine and adding sulphur and other allowable additives to inhibit yeast activity or sterile filtering the wine to remove all yeast and bacteria.
However, in larger wineries, a mechanical crusher/destemmer is used.
To avoid this, either the wine must be sterile bottled or contain enough sulfur dioxide to inhibit the growth of bacteria.
Presses act by positioning the grape skins or whole grape clusters between a rigid surface and a movable surface and slowly decrease the volume between the two surfaces.
Usually the test checks for these acids in a cash still, but there are other methods available such as HPLC, gas chromatography and enzymatic methods.
However, one potential hazard is the metabolism of sorbate to geraniol which is a potent and unpleasant by-product.
Rejecting moldy grapes also prevents possible problems associated with acetic acid bacteria.
These accumulate at the edge of the press.
Potassium bitartrate will also precipitate, a process which can be enhanced by cold stabilization to prevent the appearance of (harmless) tartrate crystals after bottling.
Lactic acid is an acid found in dairy products.
All red wines go through complete malolactic fermentation, both to lessen the acid of the wine and to remove the possibility that malolactic fermentation will occur in the bottle.
No chemicals are needed.
It is also the most commonly used agent to reduce the tannin content.
The result of these processes is that the originally cloudy wine becomes clear.
Overall disposition of the grapevine and weather forecasts are taken into account.
There are other common measures of sugar content of grapes, Specific gravity, Oechsle (Germany) and Beaume (France).
Sensory tests will also be performed and again in response to these a winemaker may take remedial action such as the addition of a protein to soften the taste of the wine.
On occasion, the winemaker may decide to leave them in if the grapes themselves contain less tannin than desired.
During or after the alcoholic fermentation, a secondary, or malolactic fermentation can also take place, during which specific strains of bacteria (lactobacter) convert malic acid into the milder lactic acid.
Fining agents are used during winemaking to remove tannins, reduce astringency and remove microscopic particles that could cloud the wines.
The winemakers decide on which fining agents are used and these may vary from product to product and even batch to batch (usually depending on the grapes of that particular year).
Since the early 1990s, modern mechanical basket presses have been revived through higher-end producers seeking to replicate the gentle pressing of the historical basket presses.
producing strain of Saccharomyces may deter acetic acid producing yeast.
This fermentation is often initiated by inoculation with desired bacteria.
The wine is kept warm and the remaining sugars are converted into alcohol and carbon dioxide.
Microbial stabilization does not imply sterility, i.e.
Use of sulfur dioxide and inoculation with a low-V.A.
This can be an effective first line of defense to prevent inferior quality fruit from contaminating a lot or tank of wine.
If added after alcoholic ferment it will have the effect of preventing or stopping malolactic fermentation, bacterial spoilage and help protect against the damaging effects of oxygen.
For red wines, the temperature is typically 22 to 25&nbsp;°C, and for white wines 15 to 18&nbsp;°C.
This is to avoid any extraction of tannin from either the skins or grapeseeds, as well as maintaining proper juice flow through a matrix of grape clusters rather than loose berries.
It also results in an increase in the pH of the juice which may be desirable for overly acidic grapes.
Some aromatized wines contain honey or egg-yolk extract.
Therefore, to achieve one percent alcohol the winemaker adds 1.8&nbsp;grams per 100 ml or 18&nbsp;grams per liter&nbsp;— a practice known as chaptalization, which is illegal in some countries and in California.
Yeast may be added to the juice for white wine.
The sugar percentage of the must is calculated from the measured density, the must weight, with the help of a specialized type of hydrometer called a saccharometer.
Depending on the desired taste, it could be fermented mainly in stainless steel to be briefly put in oak, or have the complete fermentation done in stainless steel.
Red wines are produced by destemming and crushing the grapes into a tank and leaving the skins in contact with the juice throughout the fermentation (maceration).
Sometimes winemakers choose pressures which separate the streams of pressed juice, called making "press cuts."
Sterile bottling includes the use of filtration.
Mechanical harvesters have the advantage of being able to cover a large area of vineyard land in a relatively short period of time, and with a minimum investment of manpower per harvested ton.
Generally when making white wine the fruit is only crushed, the stems are then placed in the press with the berries.
Sweet wines or off-dry wines are made by arresting fermentation before all sugar has been converted into ethanol and allowing some residual sugar to remain.
Some winemakers remove leaves and loose debris from the grapevine before mechanical harvesting to avoid such material being included in the harvested fruit.
Harvest is the picking of the grapes and in many ways the first step in wine production.
Clarification of the wine can take place naturally by putting the wine into refrigeration at .
The secondary fermentation usually takes place in either large stainless steel vessels with a volume of several cubic meters, or oak barrels, depending on the goals of the winemakers.
Single berry harvesting, as is done with some German Trockenbeerenauslese, avoids this step altogether with the grapes being individually selected.
Proteins from the grape are broken down and the remaining yeast cells and other fine particles from the grapes are allowed to settle.
Generally, hydrometers are a cheaper alternative.
Mechanical harvesters are large tractors that straddle grapevine trellises and, using firm plastic or rubber rods, strike the fruiting zone of the grapevine to dislodge the grapes from the rachis.
If the sugar content of the grapes is too low to obtain the desired alcohol percentage, sugar can be added (chaptalization).
For every gram of sugar that is converted, about half a gram of alcohol is produced, so to achieve a 12% alcohol concentration, the must should contain about 24% sugars.
Manual harvesting is the hand-picking of grape clusters from the grapevines.
Most red wines derive their color from grape skins (the exception being varieties or hybrids of non-vinifera vines which contain juice pigmented with the dark Malvidin 3,5-diglucoside anthocyanin) and therefore contact between the juice and skins is essential for color extraction.
They may also form in wine bottles that have been stored under very cold conditions.
In the making of white wine it can be added prior to fermentation and immediately after alcoholic fermentation is complete.
In traditional and smaller-scale wine making, the harvested grapes are sometimes crushed by trampling them barefoot or by the use of inexpensive small scale crushers.
Microbial stabilization requires a filtration of at least 0.65 micrometers for yeast retention and 0.45&nbsp;µm for bacteria retention.
The next process in the making of red wine is malo-lactic conversion.
With rose, the skins may be kept in contact for a shorter period to give color to the wine, in that case the must may be pressed as well.
In the making of red wine, sulfur dioxide may be used at high levels (100&nbsp;mg per liter) prior to ferment to assist in color stabilization.
pH can be reduced roughly at a rate of 0.1 units per 1 gram/litre of tartaric acid addition.
Typically this free-run juice is of a higher quality than the press juice.
Modern presses dictate the duration and pressure at each press cycle, usually ramping from 0 Bar to 2.0 Bar.
The use of lactic acid bacteria is the reason why some chardonnays can taste "buttery" due to the production of diacetyl by the bacteria.
The must is then pressed, and fermentation continues as if the winemaker was making a white wine.
With red wines, the must is pressed after primary fermentation, which separates the skins and other solid matter from the liquid.
Pressing is the act of applying pressure to grapes or pomace in order to separate juice or wine from grapes and grape skins.
Manual harvesting has the advantage of using knowledgeable labor to not only pick the ripe clusters but also to leave behind the clusters that are not ripe or contain bunch rot or other defects.
This layer of skins and other solids is known as the cap.
This serves to extract flavor and tannin from the skins (the tannin being extracted to encourage protein precipitation without excessive Bentonite addition) as well as Potassium ions, which participate in bitartrate precipitation (cream of tartar).
can be filtered (to remove the microbe responsible) and blended with a low V.A.
Once the wine is bottled and corked, the bottles are put into refrigeration with temperatures near .
Destemming is the process of separating stems from the grapes.
Variations on the above procedure exist.
In the United States, some grapes are picked into one- or two-ton bins for transport back to the winery.
Because acetic acid bacteria require oxygen to grow, eliminating any air in wine containers as well as addition of sulfur dioxide will limit their growth.
If increased skin extraction is desired, a winemaker might choose to crush the grapes after destemming.
This will cause the crystals to separate from the wine and stick to the sides of the holding vessel.
In some cases, notably with "delicate" red varietals such as Pinot noir or Syrah, all or part of the grapes might be left uncrushed (called "whole berry") to encourage the retention of fruity aromas through partial carbonic maceration.
Although most wine is made from grapes, it may also be made from other fruits or plants.
White wines vary in the use of malolactic fermentation during their making.
Often in these high sugar wines, the fermentation stops naturally as the high concentration of sugar and rising concentration of ethanol retard the yeast activity.
The quality of the grapes determines the quality of the wine more than any other factor.
The time from harvest to drinking can vary from a few months for Beaujolais nouveau wines to over twenty years for wine of good structure with high levels of acid, tannin or sugar.
This is because malic acid has two acid radicals (-COOH) while lactic acid has only one.
However, small additions (say, ) should be used to avoid bleaching red pigments and the maintenance level should be about 20 mg/L.
A relatively new method for removal of volatile acidity from a wine is reverse osmosis.
Additional tests include those for the crystallization of cream of tartar (potassium hydrogen tartrate) and the precipitation of heat unstable protein; this last test is limited to white wines.
Besides gelatin, other fining agents for wine are often derived from animal products, such as micronized potassium casseinate (casein is milk protein), egg whites, egg albumin, bone char, bull's blood, isinglass (Sturgeon bladder), PVPP (a synthetic compound), lysozyme, and skim milk powder.
However, the pH should be monitored and not allowed to rise above a pH of 3.55 for whites or a pH of 3.80 for reds.
In other cases the winemaker may choose to hold back some of the sweet grape juice and add it to the wine after the fermentation is done, a technique known in Germany as süssreserve.
Basket presses are composed of a cylinder of wooden slats on top of a fixed plate, with a moveable plate that can be forced downward (usually by a central ratcheting threaded screw.)
The process produces wastewater, pomace, and lees that require collection, treatment, and disposal or beneficial use.
Red wine is sometimes transferred to oak barrels to mature for a period of weeks or months; this practice imparts oak aromas and some tannin to the wine.
As the juice flow decreased, the plate was ratcheted down again.
Destemming is the process of removing the grapes from the rachis (the stem which holds the grapes).
During the primary fermentation, the yeast cells feed on the sugars in the must and multiply, producing carbon dioxide gas and alcohol.
The wine can be racked during this process to remove the lees.
The SO2 and peroxide react to form sulphuric acid, which is then titrated with NaOH to an end point with an indicator, and the volume of NaOH required is used to calculate the SO2 level.
It is believed by advocates of basket presses that this relatively long pathway through the grape or pomace cake serves as a filter to solids that would otherwise affect the quality of the press juice.
Common tests include °Brix, pH, titratable acidity, residual sugar, free or available sulfur, total sulfur, volatile acidity and percent alcohol.
Sulfur dioxide has two primary actions, firstly it is an anti microbial agent and secondly an anti oxidant.
Pigeage is a French winemaking term for the traditional grape stomping in open fermentation tanks.
Because of the location of grape juice constituents in the berry (water and acid are found primarily in the mesocarp or pulp, whereas tannins are found primarily in the exocarp, or skin, and seeds), pressed juice or wine tends to be lower in acidity with a higher pH than the free-run juice.
This minimizes contact between grape juice and skins (as in the making of ''Blanc de noirs'' sparkling wine, which is derived from Pinot noir, a red vinifera grape.)
With white wine, the liquid is separated from the must before fermentation .
Filtration in winemaking is used to accomplish two objectives, clarification and microbial stabilization.
Depending on the quality of grape and the target wine style, some of these steps may be combined or omitted to achieve the particular goals of the winemaker.
Alcohol of more than 12% can be achieved by using yeast that can withstand high alcohol.
In these cases the grapes pass between two rollers which squeeze the grapes enough to separate the skin and pulp, but not so much as to cause excessive shearing or tearing of the skin tissues.
This was a practice more common in the 1970s than today, though still practiced by some Sauvignon blanc and Chardonnay producers in California.
Some yeasts can produce 18% alcohol in the wine however extra sugar is added to produce a high alcohol content.
In response to the results of these tests, a winemaker can decide on appropriate remedial action, for example the addition of more sulfur dioxide.
The kind of vessel used depends on the amount of wine that is being made, the grapes being used, and the intentions of the winemaker.
This process continued until the press operator determined that the quality of the pressed juice or wine was below standard, or all liquids had been pressed.
Otherwise, it is used at the end of malolactic ferment and performs the same functions as in white wine.
The press wine is blended with the free run wine at the winemaker's discretion.
Gelatin has been used in winemaking for centuries and is recognized as a traditional method for wine fining, or clarifying.
Non-animal-based filtering agents are also often used, such as bentonite (a volcanic clay-based filter), diatomaceous earth, cellulose pads, paper filters and membrane filters (thin films of plastic polymer material having uniformly sized holes).
As the pressure increases the amount of tannin extracted from the skins into the juice increases, often rendering the pressed juice excessively tannic or harsh.
Volatile acidity test verifies if there is any steam distillable acids in the wine.
The decision about destemming is different for red and white wine making.
After the primary fermentation of red grapes the free run wine is pumped off into tanks and the skins are pressed to extract the remaining juice and wine.
This can make the wine sweet when a dry wine is desired.
The production of geraniol occurs only if sorbic acid is present during malo-lactic fermentation.
Different batches of wine can be mixed before bottling in order to achieve the desired taste.
In clarification, large particles that affect the visual appearance of the wine are removed.
The wine takes about a month to settle and it is clear.
Many wines of comparable quality are produced using similar but distinctly different approaches to their production; quality is dictated by the attributes of the starting material and not necessarily the steps taken during vinification.
wine, so that the acetic acid level is below the sensory threshold.
The carbon dioxide is lost to the atmosphere.
'''Winemaking''' or '''vinification''', is the production of wine, starting with selection of the grapes or other produce and ending with bottling the finished wine.
The temperature during the fermentation affects both the taste of the end product, as well as the speed of the fermentation.
They are formed by the union of tartaric acid and potassium, and may appear to be sediment in the wine, though they are not.
Oak could be added as chips used with a non-wooden barrel instead of a fully wooden barrel.
The primary, or alcoholic fermentation can be done with this natural yeast, but since this can give unpredictable results depending on the exact types of yeast that are present, cultured yeast is often added to the must.
Generally no gelatin remains in the wine because it reacts with the wine components, as it clarifies, and forms a sediment which is removed by filtration prior to bottling.
Blending may also help—a wine with high V.A.
One Be° is equal to 1.8 Brix, that is 1.8&nbsp;grams of sugar per one hundred grams.
During the cold stabilizing process after fermentation, the temperature of the wine is dropped to close to freezing for 1–2 weeks.
Without the use of sulfur dioxide, wines can readily suffer bacterial spoilage no matter how hygienic the winemaking practice.
The presence of stems in the mix facilitates pressing by allowing juice to flow past flattened skins.
This is more acceptable if the stems have 'ripened' and started to turn brown.
One of the main problems with the use of wild ferments is the failure for the fermentation to go to completion, that is some sugar remains unfermented.
However, most wineries do use presses in order to increase their production (gallons) per ton, as pressed juice can represent between 15%-30% of the total juice volume from the grape.
Once fermentation begins, the grape skins are pushed to the surface by carbon dioxide gases released in the fermentation process.
°Brix is one measure of the soluble solids in the grape juice and represents not only the sugars but also includes many other soluble substances such as salts, acids and tannins, sometimes called Total Soluble Solids (TSS).
Other considerations include phenological ripeness, berry flavor, tannin development (seed color and taste).
Because sugar is the dominant compound in grape juice, these units are effectively a measure of sugar level.
Most white wines are processed without destemming or crushing and are transferred from picking bins directly to the press.
During this fermentation, which often takes between one and two weeks, the yeast converts most of the sugars in the grape juice into ethanol (alcohol) and carbon dioxide.
In some cool areas in the southern hemisphere, for example Tasmania, harvesting extends into May.
Furthermore, small additions (say 20&nbsp;mg per liter) may be made to red wine after alcoholic ferment and before malolactic ferment to overcome minor oxidation and prevent the growth of acetic acid bacteria.
These tartrate crystals look like grains of clear sand, and are also known as "wine crystals" or "wine diamonds".
In other countries (such as Australia and New Zealand), mechanical harvesting of premium winegrapes is more common because of general labor shortages.
During the secondary fermentation and aging process, which takes three to six months, the fermentation continues very slowly.
Crushing is the process when gently squeezing the berries and breaking the skins to start to liberate the contents of the berries.
The wine bottles then are traditionally sealed with a cork, although alternative wine closures such as synthetic corks and screwcaps, which are less subject to cork taint, are becoming increasingly popular.
Yeast is normally already present on the grapes, often visible as a powdery appearance of the grapes.
Malolactic fermentation can improve the taste of wine that has high levels of malic acid, because malic acid, in higher concentration, generally causes an unpleasant harsh and bitter taste sensation, whereas lactic acid is more gentle and less sour.
The science of wine and winemaking is known as oenology.
