The population is 67.5% white as of 2011 (down from 73.5% in 2006), while non-aboriginal visible minorities represent 21.4% as of 2011 (up from 16.3% in 2006).
The Canadian Mennonite University is a private Mennonite undergraduate university established in 1999.
This point was at the crossroads of canoe routes travelled by First Nations before European contact.
In 1942, the Victory Loan Campaign staged a mock Nazi invasion of Winnipeg to promote awareness of the stakes of the war in Europe.
Cycling is popular in Winnipeg, and there are many bicycle trails and lanes around the city.
The robbery rate in 2012 was between 250.1 and 272.9.
Winnipeg is the largest and best connected city within Manitoba, and has highways leading in all directions from the city.
The Goldeyes play at Shaw Park, which was completed in 1999.
The original Winnipeg Jets, the city's former NHL team, left for Phoenix, Arizona after the 1995–96 season due to mounting financial troubles, despite a campaign effort to "Save the Jets".
The City Council is a unicameral legislative body, representing geographical wards throughout the city.
Statistics Canada's estimate of the Winnipeg CMA population as of 1 July 2015 is 793,428.
Investors Group Field
17 Wing also acts as a deployed operating base for CF-18 Hornet fighter-bombers assigned to the Canadian NORAD Region.
Winnipeg Arena (1996–2004)MTS Centre (2004–2011, 2015–present)
Winnipeg is home to 33 AM and FM radio stations, two of which are French-language stations.
The area was populated for several thousands of years by First Nations peoples.
+Professional sports teams
The average age of a Winnipegger in May 2006 was 38.7, compared to an average of 39.5 for Canada as a whole.
This multicultural city hosts numerous annual festivals, including the Festival du Voyageur, the Winnipeg Folk Festival, the Jazz Winnipeg Festival, the Winnipeg Fringe Theatre Festival, and Folklorama.
The two companies competed fiercely over trade.
Winnipeg has had public transit since 1882, starting with horse-drawn streetcars.
Apart from the city of Winnipeg, the Winnipeg CMA includes the rural municipalities of Springfield, St. Clements, Taché, East St. Paul, Macdonald, Ritchot, West St. Paul, Headingley, the Brokenhead 4 reserve, and Rosser and St. François Xavier.
Winnipeg has been home to several professional hockey teams.
On average there are 317.8 days per year with measurable sunshine, with July seeing the most on average.
Additionally, some American network affiliates are available over-the-air.
Excluding the three levels of government, 17 Wing is the fourth largest employer in the city.
Past hockey teams based in Winnipeg include the Winnipeg Maroons, Winnipeg Warriors, three time Stanley Cup Champion Winnipeg Victorias and the Winnipeg Falcons, who were the first ever Gold Medal Olympians, representing Canada in 1920 in Antwerp, Belgium.
The primary telecommunications carrier is MTS, although a number of other corporations offer telephone, cellular, television and internet services in the city.
Many French and later British men who were trappers married First Nations women; their mixed-race children hunted, traded, and lived in the area.
Original: 1972–1996Current: 2011
Winnipeg has three daily newspapers: the ''Winnipeg Free Press'', the ''Winnipeg Sun'', and the ''Metro Winnipeg''.
On 8 November 1873, Winnipeg was incorporated as a city, with the Selkirk settlement as its nucleus.
There are six Senators representing Manitoba in Ottawa: three Liberals, two Conservatives, and one Independent.
The coldest temperature ever recorded was  on 24 December 1879.
The frost-free season is comparatively long for a location with such severe winters.
The Manitoba Theatre for Young People at The Forks is one of only two Theatres for Young Audiences in Canada with a permanent residence, and is the only Theatre for Young Audiences that offers a full season of plays for teenagers.
From the early 1990s to the mid-2000s, Winnipeg had a significant auto-theft problem, with the rate peaking at 2,165.0 per 100,000 residents in 2006 compared to 487 auto-thefts per 100,000 residents for Canada as a whole.
Winnipeg Bus Terminal, located at Winnipeg International Airport, offers domestic and international service by Greyhound Canada, Grey Goose Bus Lines, Winnipeg Shuttle Service and Brandon Air Shuttle.
Festival du Voyageur, Western Canada's largest winter festival, celebrates the early French explorers of the Red River Valley.
The population density of the city of Winnipeg averaged 1,430 people per km2, compared with 2.2 for Manitoba.
Winnipeg is protected by the Winnipeg Police Service, which in 2012 had 1,442 police officers.
1996–2011, 2015–present
It has one of the country's most diversified economies, with major employment in the trade (15.2%), manufacturing (9.8%), educational (7.7%), and health care and social assistance (15.2%) sectors.
Booth University College is a private Christian Salvation Army university college established in 1982.
As of 2010, median household income in the city was $72,050.
The city receives over 10,000 net international immigrants per year.
The full-size replica of the ship ''Nonsuch'' is the museum's showcase piece.
Winnipeg Transit now runs diesel buses on its routes.
The Winnipeg Public Library is a public library network with 20 branches throughout the city, including the main Millennium Library.
The fort was destroyed by a flood in 1826 and was not rebuilt until 1835.
In 2012, Winnipeg was ranked by KPMG as the least expensive location to do business in western Canada.
This practice represents a significant budget expenditure and is more expansive than in comparable communities.
The stock market crash of 1929 and the Great Depression resulted in widespread unemployment, worsened by drought and low agricultural prices.
In 2013, The CIBC Metropolitan Economic Activity Index rated Winnipeg's economy as fourth in a national survey of 25 city economies, behind Toronto, Calgary, and Regina.
However, the city faced financial difficulty when the Panama Canal opened in 1914.
The RWB also runs a full-time classical dance school.
As of May 2014, the Consumer Price Index was 125.8 relative to 2002 prices, reflecting consumer costs at the Canadian average.
Evidence provided by archaeology, petroglyphs, rock art and oral history indicates that native peoples used the area in prehistoric times for camping, harvesting, hunting, tool making, fishing, trading and, farther north, for agriculture.
In May 1954, CBWT went on the air with four hours of broadcasting per day.
The North West Company built Fort Gibraltar in 1809, and the Hudson's Bay Company built Fort Douglas in 1812, both in the area of present-day Winnipeg.
In November 2013, the national police union reviewed the Winnipeg Police Force and found high average response times for several categories of calls.
The Aboriginal population grew by 22% between 2001 and 2006, compared to an increase of 3% for the city as a whole; this population tends to be younger and less wealthy than non-Aboriginal residents.
Unlike most of Canada, the city experienced a decrease in unemployment in 2013, ending the year at a rate of 5.8 percent.
Downtown Winnipeg, the city's financial heart and economic core, is centred on the intersection of Portage Avenue and Main Street.
It is the sixth-largest in the country and includes the world's largest public collection of contemporary Inuit art.
One of these, The Forks, attracts four million visitors a year.
Winnipeg also has the highest Métis population in both percentage (6.3%) and numbers (41,005); the growth rate for this population between 2001 and 2006 was 30%.
The University of Winnipeg received its charter in 1967.
Approximately  of land to the north and west of the airport has been designated as an inland port, CentrePort Canada, and is Canada's first Foreign Trade Zone.
There are two squadrons based in the city.
It also features a  skate plaza, a  bowl complex, the Esplanade Riel bridge, a river walkway, Shaw Park, and the Canadian Museum for Human Rights.
Other languages spoken as a mother tongue in Winnipeg include Tagalog (5.0%), German (2.5%), and Punjabi and Ukrainian (both 1.4%).
The city draws its water via an aqueduct from Shoal Lake, treating and fluoridating it at the Deacon Reservoir just outside the city prior to pumping it into the Winnipeg system.
Winnipeg contracts out several services to private companies, including garbage and recycling collection and street plowing and snow removal.
Sieur de La Vérendrye built the first fur trading post on the site in 1738, called Fort Rouge.
Winnipeg lies at the bottom of the Red River Valley, a flood plain with an extremely flat topography.
There were approximately 21,000 employers in the city as of 2012.
Osborne Village is Winnipeg's most densely populated neighbourhood, as well as one of the most densely populated neighbourhoods in Western Canada.
French trading continued at this site for several decades before the arrival of the British Hudson's Bay Company after France ceded the territory following its defeat in the Seven Years' War.
It was the first organization to be granted a royal title by Queen Elizabeth II, and has included notable dancers such as Evelyn Hart and Mikhail Baryshnikov.
The Winnipeg Jets of the National Hockey League (NHL) have called the city home since 2011.
The Manitoba Legislative Building, constructed mainly of Tyndall stone, opened in 1920; its dome supports a bronze statue finished in gold leaf, titled "Eternal Youth and the Spirit of Enterprise" (commonly known as the "Golden Boy").
Northern League (1994–2010)American Association (2011–present)
The Royal Canadian Mint, established in 1976, is where all circulating coinage in Canada is produced.
They were replaced by electric trolley cars.
The team had led the Northern League for ten straight years in average attendance through 2010, with more than 300,000 annual fan visits, until the league collapsed and merged into the American Association of Independent Professional Baseball.
Both the First Nations and more recent Eastern Canadian, European, and Asian immigrants have helped shape Winnipeg's dining scene, giving birth to dishes such as the desserts schmoo torte and wafer pie.
It is a private sector initiative to develop the infrastructure for Manitoba's trucking, air, rail and sea industries.
), Route 17 (Chief Peguis Trail), and Route 90 (Brookside Blvd., Oak Point Hwy., King Edward St., Century St., Kenaston Blvd.
A settlement was later founded by the Selkirk settlers of the Red River Colony in 1812, the nucleus of which was incorporated as the City of Winnipeg in 1873.
Le Cercle Molière, based in St Boniface, is the oldest theatre company in Canada; it was founded in 1925.
As of the 2006 census, 48.3 percent of residents were male and 51.7 percent were female.
The city has the greatest percentage of Filipino residents (8.7%) of any major Canadian city, although Toronto has more Filipinos by total population.
Winnipeg developed rapidly after the coming of the Canadian Pacific Railway in 1881.
Television broadcasting in Winnipeg started in 1954.
Wind chill is an issue in the local climate.
It also contributed to a demographic shift beginning shortly after Confederation that saw the francophone population decrease from a majority to a small minority group.
Total annual precipitation (both rain and snow) is just over .
The Métis and Lord Selkirk's settlers fought at the Battle of Seven Oaks in 1816.
CBC Radio One and CBC Radio 2 broadcast local and national programming in the city.
They eventually moved to the Kapyong Barracks located between River Heights and Tuxedo.
Lord Selkirk was involved with the first permanent settlement (known as the Red River Colony), the purchase of land from the Hudson's Bay Company, and a survey of river lots in the early 19th century.
The wind chill has gone down as low as  and on average there are 12 days of the year that can reach a wind chill below .
Other large city parks include Kildonan Park and St. Vital Park.
The services have faced numerous complaints from residents in 2013–14 about missed service.
In 1981, Winnipeg was one of the first cities in Canada to sign a tripartite agreement with the provincial and federal governments to redevelop its downtown area, and the three levels of government contributed over $271 million to its development.
The federal government refused to license any private broadcaster until the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation had created a national network.
Since 2004, the battalion has operated out of CFB Shilo near Brandon.
The highest temperature ever recorded in Winnipeg was  on 11 July 1936 while the highest daily low temperature was  on July 12 1936 The apparent heat can be even more extreme due to bursts of humidity and on 25 July 2007 a  reading of the humidex was measured.
MTC is Canada's oldest English-language regional theatre, with over 250 performances yearly.
They gradually developed as an ethnicity known as the Métis because of sharing a traditional culture.
The National Microbiology Laboratory in Winnipeg is one of only a handful of biosafety level 4 microbiology laboratories in the world.
It allows travellers on the Trans-Canada Highway to bypass the city.
In 2009, construction began on a $212-million four-lane freeway that would eventually connect CentrePort with the Perimeter Highway.
Fifty percent of Winnipeg residents use a taxi at least once during the year.
The Pantages Playhouse Theatre opened as a vaudeville house in 1913.
There are several TV and film production companies in Winnipeg: the most prominent are Farpoint Films, Frantic Films, Buffalo Gal Pictures, and Les Productions Rivard.
According to the Conference Board of Canada, Winnipeg is projected to experience a real GDP growth of 2 percent in 2014.
Winnipeg Blue Bombers
Battalion members who survived combat were taken prisoner and endured brutal treatment in prisoner of war camps.
The federal government has contributed $100 million towards the estimated $311-million project.
It is on the eastern edge of the Canadian Prairies in Western Canada and is known as the "Gateway to the West".
A rebuilt section of the fort, consisting of the front gate and a section of the wall, can be found near the modern-day corner of Main Street and Broadway Avenue in downtown Winnipeg.
The major commercial areas in the city are Polo Park, Kildonan Crossing, South St. Vital, Garden City (West Kildonan),Pembina Strip, Kenaston Smart Centre,Osborne Village, and the Corydon strip.
Folklorama is the largest and longest-running cultural celebration festival in the world.
By 1911, Winnipeg was Canada's third-largest city.
According to the Canadian Real Estate Association, the average house price in Winnipeg was $260,000 as of 2013.
In addition, 435 Squadron is the only Royal Canadian Air Force squadron equipped and trained to conduct tactical air-to-air refueling of fighter aircraft.
Some of the city's major arterial roads include Route 80 (Waverley St.), Route 155 (McGillivray Blvd), Route 165 (Bishop Grandin Blvd.
The plant, located in southeastern Winnipeg, also produces coins for many other countries.
Downtown Winnipeg's Exchange District is named after the area's original grain exchange, which operated from 1880 to 1913.
One of the leaders of the strike, J. S. Woodsworth, went on to found Canada's first major socialist party, the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation, which later became the New Democratic Party.
Water and sewage services are provided by the city.
Winnipeg holds an annual Bike-to-Work Day and Cyclovia, and bicycle commuters may be seen year-round, even in the winter.
General Garnet Wolseley was sent to put down the uprising.
, approximately 416,700 people are employed in Winnipeg and the surrounding area.
Among the most notable musical acts associated with Winnipeg are Bachman–Turner Overdrive, the Crash Test Dummies, The Guess Who, Neil Young, The Wailin' Jennys, and The Weakerthans.
Fort Gibraltar was renamed Fort Garry in 1822 and became the leading post in the region for the Hudson's Bay Company.
Other types of property crime have also decreased, but rates are still fairly high.
Active living infrastructure in Winnipeg encourages bicycling through the inclusion of bike lanes and sharrows.
There are also research facilities operated through hospitals and private biotechnology companies.
The city was threatened by the 1997 Red River flood as well as further floods in 2009 and 2011.
As of the Canada 2011 Census there were 663,617 people living in Winnipeg proper, with approximately 730,018 living in the Winnipeg Census Metropolitan Area (CMA).
In 1821, the Hudson's Bay and North West Companies merged, ending their long-standing rivalry.
Winnipeg has four major rivers: the Red, Assiniboine, La Salle and Seine.
Since 1992, the city of Winnipeg has been represented by 15 city councillors and a mayor, both elected every four years.
The generally flat terrain and the poor drainage of the Red River Valley's clay-based soil also results in many mosquitoes during wetter years.
Many of Downtown Winnipeg's major buildings are linked with the Winnipeg Walkway.
The city is a single-tier municipality, governed by a mayor-council system.
Winnipeg was the first Canadian city to ever host the Pan American Games, and the second city to host the event twice, in 1967 and again in 1999.
Winnipeg's three largest performing arts venues, the Centennial Concert Hall, Manitoba Theatre Centre (MTC) and the Pantages Playhouse Theatre, are located downtown.
Guy Maddin's ''My Winnipeg'', an independent film released in 2008, is a comedic rumination on the city's history.
The four-lane Perimeter Highway, built in 1969, serves as a Ring Road, with at-grade intersections and a few interchanges.
The University of Manitoba is the largest university in Manitoba.
The largest park in the city, Assiniboine Park, houses the Assiniboine Park Zoo and the Leo Mol Sculpture Garden.
More than 30,000 workers walked off their jobs in May 1919 in what came to be known as the Winnipeg general strike.
In 1869–70, present-day Winnipeg was the site of the Red River Rebellion, a conflict between the local provisional government of Métis, led by Louis Riel, and newcomers from eastern Canada.
The structure of the municipal government is set by the provincial legislature in the City of Winnipeg Charter Act, which replaced the old City of Winnipeg Act in 2003.
The series' illustrator, Ernest H. Shepard, created the only known oil painting of Winnipeg's adopted fictional bear, displayed in Assiniboine Park.
Winnipeg has a significant and increasing Aboriginal population, with both the highest percentage of Aboriginal peoples (11.7%) for any major Canadian city, and the highest total number of Aboriginals (76,055) for any single non-reserve municipality.
The city has a total area of .
Winnipeg also has two independent colleges: Red River College and Booth University College.
In 1989, the reclamation and redevelopment of the CNR rail yards turned The Forks into Winnipeg's most popular tourist attraction.
In provincial politics, Winnipeg is represented by 31 of the 57 provincial Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs).
Due to construction delays and cost overruns, the stadium was not ready in time for the 2012 CFL season, instead opening in 2013.
The city is named after the nearby Lake Winnipeg; the name comes from the Western Cree words for muddy water.
On the international stage, Winnipeg has hosted national and world hockey championships on a number of occasions, most notably the 1999 World Junior Hockey Championship and 2007 Women's World Hockey Championship.
When the war ended, pent-up demand generated a boom in housing development, although building activity was checked by the 1950 Red River flood.
Between the censuses of 2006 and 2011, Winnipeg's population increased by 4.8 percent, compared to 5.2 percent for Manitoba as a whole.
Winnipeg has had the highest violent crime index since 2009.
Winnipeg Arena (1972–1996)MTS Centre (2011–present)
It is the only major city between Vancouver and Thunder Bay with direct US connections by rail.
To combat auto theft, Manitoba Public Insurance established financial incentives for motor vehicle owners to install ignition immobilizers in their vehicles, and now requires owners of high-risk vehicles to install immobilizers.
Winnipeg has been home to a number of professional baseball teams, most recently the Winnipeg Goldeyes since 1994.
Winnipeg is named after nearby Lake Winnipeg; the name is a transcription of the Western Cree words for muddy or brackish water.
Other major downtown areas are The Forks, Central Park, Broadway-Assiniboine and Chinatown.
In soccer, it is represented by the Winnipeg Alliance FC in the Canadian Major Indoor Soccer League and the WSA Winnipeg in the USL Premier Development League.
The mayor is elected by direct popular vote to serve as the chief executive of the city.
Two strikers were killed and at least thirty others were injured on the day that became known as ''Bloody Saturday''; the event polarized the population.
The city was subject to severe flooding in the past.
Known as the "Gateway to the West", Winnipeg is a railway and transportation hub with a diversified economy.
In the 1997 flood, flood control dikes were reinforced and raised using sandbags; Winnipeg suffered very limited damage compared to the flood's impact on cities without such structures, such as Grand Forks, North Dakota.
The city has developed many distinct dishes and cooking styles, notably in the areas of confectionery and hot-smoked fish.
Métis legislator and interpreter James McKay named the city.
To the south, Winnipeg is connected to the United States via Provincial Trunk Highway 75 (PTH 75) (a continuation of I-29 and US 75, known as Pembina Highway or Route 42 within Winnipeg).
The $200-million facility is also the home to the CIS' University of Manitoba Bisons and the Winnipeg Rifles of the Canadian Junior Football League.
There are now five English-language stations and one French-language station based in Winnipeg.
Named CentrePort Canada Way, it was opened in November 2013.
The Winnipeg Blue Bombers play in the Canadian Football League.
The practice quickly expanded, driven by the demand by traders for provisions.
This flood prompted Duff Roblin's provincial government to build the Red River Floodway to protect the city; the project began in 1962 and was completed in 1968.
NCI is devoted to Aboriginal programming.
The Manitoba Chamber Orchestra runs a series of chamber orchestral concerts each year.
After many arrests, deportations, and incidents of violence, the strike ended on 21 June 1919; when the Riot Act was read and a group of Royal Canadian Mounted Police officers charged a group of strikers.
Some of Winnipeg's largest employers are government and government-funded institutions, including: the Province of Manitoba, the City of Winnipeg, the University of Manitoba, the Health Sciences Centre, and Manitoba Hydro.
The Winnipeg International Writers Festival (also called THIN AIR) brings writers to Winnipeg for workshops and readings.
The Wing comprises three squadrons and six schools; it also provides support to the Central Flying School.
Winnipeg's location in the Canadian Prairies gives it a humid continental climate (Köppen ''Dfb'') Summers have a July mean average of .
Being located very far inland, the local climate is extremely seasonal even by Canadian standards with average January lows of around  and average July highs of .
Ethnic origins, 2011
