Another associate wrote: "He is&nbsp;... the slave of the words which his mind forms about ideas&nbsp;... And he can convince himself of almost every truth if it is once allowed thus to start on its wild career through his rhetorical machinery."
Churchill's first major speech on defence on 7 February 1934 stressed the need to rebuild the Royal Air Force and to create a Ministry of Defence; his second, on 13 July urged a renewed role for the League of Nations.
As William Rees-Mogg has stated, "In his own life, he had to suffer the 'black dog' of depression.
The Japanese later surrendered on 15 August 1945.
Churchill also assisted in passing the People's Budget, becoming President of the Budget League, an organisation set up in response to the opposition's Budget Protest League.
One would think such a weight would have a crushing effect upon him.
At the outbreak of the Second World War, he was again appointed First Lord of the Admiralty.
He thought this might have been the reason for the removal of Beria.
For example, in his diary entry for 10 September 1944:
His mother rarely visited him, and he wrote letters begging her either to come to the school or to allow him to come home.
During this trip he gave his Iron Curtain speech about the USSR and the creation of the Eastern Bloc.
Despite being partially paralysed down one side, he presided over a Cabinet meeting the next morning without anybody noticing his incapacity.
After Pearl Harbor was attacked, Churchill's first thought in anticipation of US help was, "We have won the war!"
Churchill probably could not have won a majority in any of the political parties in the House of Commons, and the House of Lords was completely silent when it learned of his appointment.
Churchill was an accomplished artist and took great pleasure in painting, especially after his resignation as First Lord of the Admiralty in 1915.
He was a founder of the India Defence League, a group dedicated to the preservation of British power in India.
As Wilfred Attenborough has demonstrated, the key Black Dog 'diary' entry for 14 August 1944 was an arbitrarily dated pastiche in which the explicit reference to Black Dog—the first of the few in the book (with an associated footnote definition of the term)—was taken, not from anything Churchill had said to Moran, but from much later claims made to Moran by Brendan Bracken (a non-clinician) in 1958.
The last time I saw him, while the Battle of Britain was still raging, he looked twenty years younger than before the war began&nbsp;... His uplifted spirit is transmitted to the people".
Churchill told the Irish Ambassador to London in 1946 "I said a few words in parliament the other day about your country because I still hope for a united Ireland.
He wrote in his journal, "She was my favourite friend."
For several months Churchill served in the sinecure of Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
On the way out of the Cabinet Room he told Eden "Thirty years of my life have been passed in this room.
Churchill urged Eden, on a visit to the US at the time, to "listen politely" but give "no countenance" to Roosevelt's proposals for the US, UK, USSR and Chiang Kai-Shek's China to act together to enforce "Global Collective Security" with the Japanese and French Empires taken into international trusteeship.
Clementine, who together with his daughter Mary had been at the count at Churchill's constituency in Essex (although unopposed by the major parties, Churchill had been returned with a much-reduced majority against an independent candidate) returned to meet her husband for lunch.
After two years out of Parliament, he served as Chancellor of the Exchequer in Baldwin's Conservative government of 1924–1929, controversially returning the pound sterling in 1925 to the gold standard at its pre-war parity, a move widely seen as creating deflationary pressure on the UK economy.
As a young army officer, he saw action in British India, the Anglo–Sudan War, and the Second Boer War.
And so we go on preparing more months more years precious perhaps vital for the greatness of Britain for the locusts to eat."
Beginning in 1932, when he opposed those who advocated giving Germany the right to military parity with France, Churchill spoke often of the dangers of Germany's rearmament.
Some historians see his basic attitude to India as being set out in his book ''My Early Life'' (1930).
To her suggestion that election defeat might be "a blessing in disguise" he retorted that "at the moment it seems very effectively disguised".
Churchill was still keen for a trip to Moscow, and threatened to resign, provoking a crisis in the Cabinet when Lord Salisbury threatened to resign if Churchill had his way.
He won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1953 for his overall, lifetime body of work.
It was in Bangalore he met Pamela Plowden, daughter of a civil servant; she became his first love.
Churchill's speeches were a great inspiration to the embattled British.
After the election the seven Constitutionalist candidates, including Churchill, who were elected did not act or vote as a group.
As basic British industries like cotton came under more competition in export markets, the return to the pre-war exchange was estimated to add up to 10% in costs to the industry.
In January 1924, the first Labour Government had taken office amongst fears of threats to the Constitution.
He stood for the Liberals again in the 1923 general election, losing in Leicester.
Churchill's funeral plan had been initiated in 1953, after he suffered a major stroke, under the name Operation Hope Not.
Churchill fell ill during the campaign, and had to have an appendectomy.
Winston entered the school, however, as the boy with the lowest grades in the lowest class, and he remained in that position.
The People's Budget attempted to introduce a heavy tax on land value, inspired by the economist and philosopher Henry George.
Rose, Marigold had a cold, but was reported to have recovered from the illness.
One historian has called its effect on Parliament as "electrifying".
On 12 September 1908, he and Clementine were married in St. Margaret's, Westminster.
He was highly critical of Lord Salisbury’s Conservative-dominated Government, in power from the autumn of 1895, writing to his mother in March 1897, in an obvious echo of what he perceived his late father’s position to have been, that he was a Liberal in all but name, remaining a "Tory Democrat" solely because of the issue of Irish Home Rule.
The fighting in the region dragged on for another two weeks before the dead could be recovered.
Although Churchill continued to carry out the functions of Prime Minister, including exchanging messages with the US administration about the upcoming Potsdam Conference, he was not formally reappointed until 28 May.
I shall never sit in it again.
Churchill was a major speaker and later wrote that in replying to the Vote of Thanks, he made a declaration 'on the spur of the moment' asking for delay before any decision was made by either the King or his Cabinet.
In his landscapes and still lives there is no sign of depression."
Nevertheless, although the fall of Tobruk was, by Churchill's own account "one of the heaviest blows" he received during the war, there seem to have been no tears.
When he assumed his position, oil was already being used on submarines and destroyers, but most ships were still coal-powered, though oil was sprayed on the coals to boost maximum speed.
His dentures were specially designed to aid his speech.
While it is true that he had a small following in the House of Commons during much of the 1930s, he was given privileged information by some elements within the Government, particularly by disaffected civil servants in the War Ministry.
Two of his most famous works, published after his first premiership brought his international fame to new heights, were his six-volume memoir ''The Second World War'' and ''A History of the English-Speaking Peoples''; a four-volume history covering the period from Caesar's invasions of Britain (55&nbsp;BC) to the beginning of the First World War (1914).
He soon received word that his nanny, Mrs Everest, was dying; he then returned to England and stayed with her for a week until she died.
Clementine, meanwhile, travelled to Eaton Hall to play tennis with Hugh Grosvenor, 2nd Duke of Westminster, and his family.
In 1963, he was the first of only eight people to be made an honorary citizen of the United States.
He acted as a war correspondent for several London newspapers and wrote his own books about the campaigns.
Eden wrote to his son on 10 April "W gets daily older & is apt to ... waste a great deal of time ... the outside world has little idea how difficult that becomes.
On the morning of 27 July, Churchill held a farewell Cabinet.
Nor was Storr aware that Moran's book as published was a much rewritten account which mixed together Moran's contemporaneous jottings with later material acquired from other sources.
He suffered another mild stroke in December 1956.
The first public meeting of the Arms and the Covenant Movement was on 3 December.
His actions during the ambush of the train led to speculation that he would be awarded the Victoria Cross, Britain's highest award to members of the armed forces for gallantry in the face of the enemy, but this was not possible, as he was a civilian.
Macmillan had accepted Churchill's challenge to meet the latter's ambitious public commitment to build 300,000 new homes a year, and achieved the target a year ahead of schedule.
As Europe celebrated peace at the end of six years of war, Churchill was concerned with the possibility that the celebrations would soon be brutally interrupted.
Churchill argued that the State was perfectly entitled to dictate the doctrines of the Established Church of England and advocated non-denominational teaching in schools, by secular teachers, based on the Bible and ''Hymns Ancient and Modern''.
Exaggerated accounts of Churchill's belligerency during the strike soon began to circulate.
Churchill agreed to let the matter drop.
On 5 December, he issued a lengthy statement implying that the Ministry was applying unconstitutional pressure on the King to force him to make a hasty decision.
He listed British Foreign Policy priorities as Commonwealth unity and consolidation, "fraternal association" of the English-speaking world (i.e.
Seemingly staggered by the unanimous hostility of all Members, he left.
He tried three times before passing the entrance exam; he applied to be trained for the cavalry rather than the infantry because the required grade was lower and he was not required to learn mathematics, which he disliked.
Ascroft's sudden death caused a double by-election and Churchill was one of the candidates.
Keith Robbins writes that Churchill’s opinions were largely formed at this time, and without the "scrutiny and criticism" to which they would have been subjected at a university, although he also suggests that Churchill’s love of the English language might not have flourished to the same degree under university conditions.
They have had a very hard time".
He was obviously respected.
Others such as R. R. James see Churchill's motives as entirely honourable and disinterested, that he felt deeply for the King.
During October 1944, he and Eden were in Moscow to meet with the Russian leadership.
After returning as Prime Minister, Churchill issued a note for the Cabinet on 29 November 1951.
The coffin was then taken the short distance to Waterloo station where it was loaded onto a specially prepared and painted carriage as part of the funeral train for its rail journey to , seven miles north-west of Oxford.
In Europe 350 million people, including 25 million in Britain, watched the funeral on television, and only Ireland did not broadcast it live.
His escape made him a minor national hero for a time in Britain though, instead of returning home, he rejoined General Buller's army on its march to relieve the British at the Siege of Ladysmith and take Pretoria.
There has been debate over Churchill's alleged culpability in the deaths of millions of Indians during the Bengal famine of 1943.
He took much of the blame for the fiasco, and when Prime Minister Asquith formed an all-party coalition government, the Conservatives demanded his demotion as the price for entry.
An American visitor reported in late 1940 that, "Everywhere I went in London people admired Churchill's energy, his courage, his singleness of purpose.
Joseph Stalin had bowed out, citing the need for his presence in the Soviet Union to attend to the Stalingrad crisis.
It would be another decade before Churchill finally did hand over the reins.
Upon re-election, Roosevelt immediately set about implementing a new method of providing military hardware and shipping to Britain without the need for monetary payment.
Despite the difficulties with Moran's book, the many illustrations it provides of a Churchill understandably plunged into temporary low mood by military defeats and other severely adverse developments constitute a compelling portrait of a great man reacting to, but not significantly impeded by, worry and overstrain, a compelling portrait that is entirely consistent with the portraits of others who worked closely with Churchill.
According to the Operation Unthinkable plan ordered by Churchill and developed by the British Armed Forces, the Third World War could have started on 1 July 1945 with a sudden attack against the allied Soviet troops.
The latter measure extended previous housing Acts, and set out details in defining housing units as "unfit for human habitation."
After an inquest, Arthur Balfour remarked, "he Churchill and a photographer were both risking valuable lives.
Trying to retain what he could of the Empire, he once stated that, "I will not preside over a dismemberment."
The British did not inform the Government of Northern Ireland that they had made the offer to the Dublin government, and De Valera's rejection was not publicised until 1970.
From his first book in 1898 until his second stint as Prime Minister, Churchill's income while out of office was almost entirely made from writing books and opinion pieces for newspapers and magazines.
In March 1916, Churchill returned to England after he had become restless in France and wished to speak again in the House of Commons.
The strain of carrying the Premiership and Foreign Office contributed to his second stroke at 10 Downing Street after dinner on the evening of 23 June 1953.
He concluded that the UK and the US must anticipate the Red Army ignoring previously agreed frontiers and agreements in Europe, and prepare to "impose upon Russia the will of the United States and the British Empire."
Moran himself leaned strongly in the direction of his patient's being "by nature very apprehensive"; close associates of Churchill have disputed the idea that apprehension was a defining feature of Churchill's temperament, although they readily concede that he was noticeably worried and anxious about some matters, especially in the buildup to important speeches in the House of Commons and elsewhere.
During some of his broadcast speeches it was noticed that he was trying to hold back the tears.
That's roughly equivalent to the number of German citizens who died from Allied raids."
Hundreds of tribesmen then ambushed them and opened fire, forcing them to retreat.
Churchill stood again for the seat of Oldham at the 1900 general election.
The most affected was the coal industry, already suffering from declining output as shipping switched to oil.
The man who was left behind was slashed to death before Churchill's eyes; afterwards he wrote of the killer, "I forgot everything else at this moment except a desire to kill this man."
Ministers like Lord Salisbury (acting Foreign Secretary) and Nutting were concerned at the irritation caused to the Americans and the French, although Selwyn Lloyd supported Churchill's initiative, as did most Conservatives.
Being a strong proponent of Britain as an international power, Churchill would often meet such moments with direct action.
This movement among Jews is not new&nbsp;... but a "world-wide conspiracy for the overthrow of civilisation and for the reconstitution of society on the basis of arrested development, of envious malevolence, and impossible equality."
Churchill was a staunch advocate of foreign intervention, declaring that Bolshevism must be "strangled in its cradle".
One of the largest assemblages of statesmen in the world was gathered for the service.
Churchill's speech was praised by Leo Amery and by Count Coudenhove-Kalergi who wrote that it would galvanise governments into action.
Born into the aristocratic family of the Dukes of Marlborough, a branch of the noble Spencer family, Winston Leonard Spencer-Churchill, like his father, used the surname "Churchill" in public life.
In January he told a colleague that he believed that de Gaulle was "a great danger to peace and for Great Britain.
The House of Commons that had ignored him during the 1930s "was now listening, and cheering".
Using the pseudonym "Charles Morin", he continued his hobby throughout his life and painted hundreds of paintings, many of which are on show in the studio at Chartwell as well as private collections.
After further discouragement from President Eisenhower (this was the McCarthy era in the US, in which Secretary of State Dulles took a Manichean view of the Cold War), Churchill announced his plans in the House of Commons on 11 May.
However, he believed that he needed at least a further £500 (equivalent to £55,000 in 2012 terms) to support a style of life equal to that of other officers of the regiment.
Despite his lifelong fame and upper-class origins, Churchill always struggled to keep his income at a level which would fund his extravagant lifestyle.
He also wrote to his old headmaster James Welldon, now Bishop of Calcutta, opposing Christian missions in India.
His first as prime minister was the famous, "I have nothing to offer but blood, toil, tears, and sweat" speech.
From 1930 onwards Morton headed a department of the Committee of Imperial Defence charged with researching the defence preparedness of other nations.
One of his most memorable war speeches came on 10 November 1942 at the Lord Mayor's Luncheon at Mansion House in London, in response to the Allied victory at the Second Battle of El Alamein.
But no one felt he would be Prime Minister after the war.
Moreover, it can be readily deduced from Moran's book that Churchill did not receive medication for depression—the amphetamine that Moran prescribed for special occasions, especially for big speeches from the autumn of 1953 onwards, was to combat the effects of Churchill's stroke of that year.
It was isolated from the other main factions within the Conservative Party pressing for faster rearmament and a stronger foreign policy; one meeting of anti-Chamberlain forces decided that Churchill would make a good Minister of Supply.
Afterwards, Churchill told a huge crowd in Whitehall: "This is your victory."
In Malaya, a rebellion against British rule had been in progress since 1948.
His own constituency effectively deselected him, although he continued to sit for Oldham until the next general election.
It is widely believed that as his mental and physical faculties decayed, he began to lose the battle he had supposedly fought for so long against the so-called "Black Dog" of depression.
His letters home show him to have been obsessed with British politics, advocating a centrist coalition between Lord Rosebery and Joseph Chamberlain, and critical of Lord Lansdowne’s proposal for increased spending on the army (opposition to which had been one of Lord Randolph’s reasons for resigning in December 1886; Churchill preferred Britain to concentrate on keeping a strong Royal Navy).
However Lord Lloyd was the first to so agitate.
Aware that he was slowing down both physically and mentally, Churchill at last retired as prime minister in 1955 and was succeeded by Anthony Eden.
Although seemingly unnoticed by Dr Storr and those he influenced, Moran later on in his book retracts his earlier suggestion, also derived from Brendan Bracken, that, towards the end of the Second World War, Churchill was succumbing to "the inborn melancholia of the Churchill blood"; also unnoticed by Storr et al., Moran, in his final chapter, states that Churchill, before the start of the First World War, "had managed to extirpate bouts of depression from his system".
Churchill came to Bangalore that year as a young army officer.
While still under the care of Mlle.
He regarded Mussolini's regime as a bulwark against the perceived threat of communist revolution, going as far (in 1933) as to call Mussolini the "Roman genius&nbsp;... the greatest lawgiver among men."
In 1956, after retiring as Prime Minister, Churchill went to Aachen to receive the Charlemagne Prize for his contribution to European Unity.
The Abdication crisis became public, coming to a head in the first two weeks of December 1936.
His speeches and radio broadcasts helped inspire British resistance, especially during the difficult days of 1940–41 when the British Commonwealth and Empire stood almost alone in its active opposition to Adolf Hitler.
He secured, from a divided and loosely organised Cabinet, intensification and prolongation of the British involvement beyond the wishes of any major group in Parliament or the nation—and in the face of the bitter hostility of Labour.
This decision prompted Keynes to write ''The Economic Consequences of Mr. Churchill'', arguing that the return to the gold standard at the pre-war parity in 1925 (£1=$4.86) would lead to a world depression.
John Charmley concurs, commenting that Churchill's self-education had not given him any training in the weighing of arguments and the absorption of the views of others, although he also points out that Lord Moran, Churchill's doctor in the 1940s, recorded Churchill's sympathy for adults who educated themselves later in life.
At that time Winston was a stocky boy with red hair who talked with a stutter and a lisp.
He undertook flying lessons himself.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn called the Operation Keelhaul "the last secret" of the Second World War.
Correspondence with his wife shows that his intent in taking up active service was to rehabilitate his reputation, but this was balanced by the serious risk of being killed.
However, Chamberlain and the rest of the War Cabinet disagreed, and the operation was delayed until the successful German invasion of Norway.
There is serious doubt about the reliability of the evidential foundations of the dominant, essentially Storrian, perception that Churchill's mental health was an open-and-shut case of clinical depression.
After being attacked on three fronts by the Allies, and in spite of Allied failures, such as Operation Market Garden, and German counter-attacks, including the Battle of the Bulge, Germany was eventually defeated.
(He also liked to play Bezique, which he learned while serving in the Boer War.)
I don't want to go there at all, I would much rather go to southern Ireland.
Churchill brooked no moderation.
Field Marshal Alanbrooke, Chief of the Imperial General Staff, who had been present when President Roosevelt broke the news of the tragedy to Churchill, focused afterwards in his diary on the superbly well judged manner in which the President made his offer of immediate military assistance, despite Alanbrooke's being ever ready to highlight what he perceived to be Churchill's contradictory motivations and flawed character during the war.
Coining the general term for the upcoming battle, Churchill stated in his "finest hour" speech to the House of Commons on 18 June, "I expect that the Battle of Britain is about to begin."
Churchill did not seek election to the Conservative Business Committee, the official leadership of the Conservative MPs.
Churchill's relationship with de Gaulle was at this time rock bottom in spite of his efforts to preserve French interests at Yalta and a visit to Paris the previous year.
He had originally sought the backing of the local Unionist association which happened to be called the Westminster Abbey Constitutional Association.
In the evening he made another broadcast to the nation asserting the defeat of Japan in the coming months.
An element of British public and political sentiment favoured a negotiated peace with Germany, among them Halifax as Foreign Secretary, but Churchill refused to consider an armistice.
These were seen as assisting the generally prosperous rentier banking and salaried classes (to which Churchill and his associates generally belonged) at the expense of manufacturers and exporters which were known then to be suffering from imports and from competition in traditional export markets, and as paring the Armed Forces, and especially the Royal Navy, too heavily.
''The Times'' wrote of him "startling the world" with "outrageous propositions" and warned that there was as yet little appetite for such unity, and that he appeared to be assuming a permanent division between Eastern and Western Europe, and urged "more humdrum" economic agreements.
Harry Hopkins passed on President Roosevelt's concerns, warning Eden that it would "give free ammunition to (US) isolationists" who might propose an American "regional council".
In ''My Early Life'' he describes Bangalore as a city with excellent weather, and his allotted house as "a magnificent pink and white stucco palace in the middle of a large and beautiful garden" with servants, dhobi (to wash clothes), gardener, watchman and a water-carrier.
For security, he usually travelled using the alias Colonel Warden.
He rushed to sail on the same ship as the newly appointed British commander, Sir Redvers Buller.
Since the appearance in 1966 of Lord Moran's memoir of his years as Churchill's doctor, with its claim that "Black Dog" was the name Churchill gave to "the prolonged fits of depression from which he suffered", many authors have suggested that throughout his life Churchill was a victim of, or at risk from, clinical depression.
The budget included the introduction of new taxes on the wealthy to allow for the creation of new social welfare programmes.
Due to obvious time constraints, Churchill attempted only one painting during the Second World War.
This time, although continuing as a war correspondent, he gained a commission in the South African Light Horse.
He proposed to Clementine during a house party at Blenheim Palace on 10 August 1908, in a small Temple of Diana.
However, Eden's serious illness (he nearly died after a series of botched operations on his bile duct) allowed Churchill to take control of foreign affairs from April 1953.
Churchill is today listed as one of the "Founding fathers of the European Union", a claim which in Boris Johnson's view contains "a very large dollop of truth".
Finally, on 31 May, with the death toll exceeding a thousand Syrians Churchill decided to act and sent de Gaulle an ultimatum saying, "In order to avoid a collision between British and French forces, we request you immediately to order French troops to cease fire and withdraw to their barracks".
However, he stressed that the UK must stick with its tradition of Parliamentary democracy, not adopt fascism.
After his resignation from the government in 1915, Churchill rejoined the British Army, attempting to obtain an appointment as brigade commander, but settling for command of a battalion.
While the rebellion was slowly being defeated, it was equally clear that colonial rule from Britain was no longer sustainable.
Eventually, heavily outnumbered, Oliva-Roget ordered his men back to their bases near the coast who were then escorted by the British.
In 1920, after the last British forces had been withdrawn, Churchill was instrumental in having arms sent to the Poles when they invaded Ukraine.
Churchill edited the Government's newspaper, the ''British Gazette''.
11 Group's underground bunker at RAF Uxbridge, now known as the Battle of Britain Bunker on 16 August 1940.
Churchill's brother, John Strange Spencer-Churchill, was born during this time in Ireland.
Now out of office, Churchill gave a speech at Zurich on 19 September 1946 in which he called for "a kind of United States of Europe" centred around a Franco-German partnership, with Britain and the Commonwealth, and perhaps the US, as "friends and sponsors of the new Europe".
He supported the Hoare-Laval Pact and continued up until 1937 to praise Benito Mussolini.
He was at the low-point in his career, in a period known as "the wilderness years".
There is not, and never was, any bitterness in my heart towards your country."
Robert Menzies, prime minister of Australia and himself a gifted phrase-maker, said of Churchill during the Second World War: "His real tyrant is the glittering phrase so attractive to his mind that awkward facts have to give way."
Churchill's pay as a second lieutenant in the 4th Hussars was £300 annually.
"The truth is," he declared in 1930, "that Gandhi-ism and everything it stands for will have to be grappled with and crushed."
His father, Lord Randolph Churchill, was a charismatic politician who served as Chancellor of the Exchequer; his mother, Jennie Jerome, was an American socialite.
The funeral train of Pullman coaches carrying his family mourners was hauled by Battle of Britain class steam locomotive No.
He toyed with the idea of studying for a degree in history, politics and economics, but regretted he did not have enough knowledge of Latin and Greek which were then a requirement of university entrance.
In speeches and press articles in this period, he forecast widespread unemployment in Britain and civil strife in India should independence be granted.
It was Winston Churchill, who tried to motivate Mikołajczyk, who was prime minister of the Polish government in exile, to accept Stalin's wishes, but Mikołajczyk refused.
In response to previous criticisms that there had been no clear single minister in charge of the prosecution of the war Churchill created and took the additional position of Minister of Defence, making him the most powerful wartime prime minister in British history.
He came under fire on his twenty-first birthday, the first of about 50 times during his life, and the Spanish awarded him his first medal.
On 4 December, he met with the King and again urged delay in any decision about abdication.
On the other hand, it has also been asserted that Churchill's involvement in the bombing of Dresden was based on the strategic and tactical aspects of winning the war.
