In 2010 they finished sixth in total medals and eleventh in gold medals.
He became the most decorated Winter Olympic athlete with eight gold medals and twelve medals overall.
The strained relationship between East and West Germany created a difficult political situation for the IOC.
He was able to recover and light the cauldron.
It was composed of cross-country skiing, shooting, downhill skiing, fencing and horse riding.
Controversy erupted when two hockey teams from the United States arrived, both claiming to be the legitimate U.S. Olympic hockey representative.
The situation became tenuous when the Berlin Wall was constructed in 1962 and western nations began refusing visas to East German athletes.
Sonja Henie defended her Olympic title and Eddie Eagan, who had been an Olympic champion in boxing in 1920, won the gold in the men's bobsleigh event to become the first, and so far only, Olympian to have won gold medals in both the Summer and Winter Olympics.
Bandy, a popular sport in the Nordic countries, was featured as a demonstration sport, though only Norway, Sweden and Finland fielded teams.
The uneasy compromise of a unified team held until the 1968 Grenoble Games when the IOC officially split the teams and threatened to reject the host-city bids of any country that refused entry visas to East German athletes.
Samaranch defended the gift as inconsequential since, as president, he was a non-voting member.
The process for awarding host city honours came under intense scrutiny after Salt Lake City had been awarded the right to host the 2002 Games.
Two Olympic flames were lit because it was the second time the Austrian town had hosted the Games.
Their performance to Ravel's ''Boléro'' earned the pair the gold medal after achieving unanimous perfect scores for artistic impression.
The rise of television as a global medium for communication enhanced the profile of the Games.
Political changes of the time were reflected in the Olympic teams appearing in France: this was the first Games to be held after the fall of Communism and the dismantling of the Berlin Wall, and Germany competed as a single nation for the first time since the 1964 Games; former Yugoslavian republics Croatia and Slovenia made their debuts as independent nations; most of the former Soviet republics still competed as a single team known as the Unified Team, but the Baltic States made independent appearances for the first time since before World War II.
Germany, Austria, Hungary, Bulgaria and Turkey were banned from competing in the Games.
Nagano's economy did experience a two-year post-Olympic spurt, but the long-term effects have not materialised as planned.
President Dmitry Medvedev called for the resignation of top sports officials immediately after the Games.
Brundage reasoned that the skiers had financially benefited from their status as athletes and were therefore no longer amateurs.
There were 37 nations and 1,158 athletes competing in 35 events.
The weather was not the only noteworthy aspect of the 1928 Games: Sonja Henie of Norway made history when she won the figure skating competition at the age of 15.
This change became effective for the 1994 Games, held in Lillehammer, Norway, which became the first Winter Olympics to be held separate from the Summer Games.
The Vancouver Games were notable for the poor performance of the Russian athletes.
In so doing she was able to help her team win a silver medal in the event at the expense of the Norwegian team, who finished fourth.
Held in the French town of Grenoble, the 1968 Winter Olympics were the first Olympic Games to be broadcast in colour.
The Italian city of Turin hosted the 2006 Winter Olympics.
The Winter Games have evolved since its inception.
It was therefore a surprise when Sarajevo, Yugoslavia, was selected as host.
At the 1998 Nagano Games American broadcaster CBS paid $375&nbsp;million, whereas the 2006 Turin Games cost NBC $613&nbsp;million to broadcast.
It was the second time that Italy had hosted the Winter Olympic Games.
The Russian pair of Yelena Berezhnaya and Anton Sikharulidze competed against the Canadian pair of Jamie Salé and David Pelletier for the gold medal.
She finished the Olympics with three golds, a silver and a bronze.
Military patrol, a precursor to the biathlon, was a medal sport in 1924 and was demonstrated in 1928, 1936 and 1948, becoming an official sport in 1960.
The German towns of Garmisch and Partenkirchen joined to organise the 1936 edition of the Winter Games, held on 6–16 February.
By the Grenoble Games, Brundage had become so concerned about the direction of the Winter Olympic Games towards commercialisation that, if it could not be corrected, he felt the Winter Olympics should be abolished.
Both skaters competed in the Games, but the gold medal was won by Oksana Baiul.
In 1955 the Soviet Union recognised East Germany as a sovereign state, thereby giving more credibility to East Germany's campaign to become an independent participant at the Olympics.
Beijing will be the first city to host both the summer and winter olympics.
A world record was worth an additional $1,500.
In 2003 the IOC awarded the 2010 Winter Olympics to Vancouver, thus allowing Canada to host its second Winter Olympics.
The women's figure skating competition garnered media attention when American skater Nancy Kerrigan was injured on 6 January 1994, in an assault planned by the ex-husband of opponent Tonya Harding.
Speed skiing was demonstrated in Albertville at the 1992 Winter Olympics.
The IOC has selected Pyeongchang, South Korea, to host the 2018 Winter Olympics and Beijing, China, to host the 2022 Winter Olympics.
The Canadians appeared to have skated well enough to win the competition, yet the Russians were awarded the gold.
Norwegian cross-country skier Marit Bjørgen won five medals in the six cross-country events on the women's programme.
Women's ice hockey made its debut and the United States won the gold medal.
Demonstration sports have historically provided a venue for host countries to attract publicity to locally popular sports by having a competition without granting medals.
This was due to a shift in ideology among IOC members, towards expansion of the Games through corporate sponsorship and the sale of television rights.
St. Moritz, Switzerland, was appointed by the IOC to host the second Olympic Winter Games in 1928.
The agreement remains in place to this day.
The athletes competed in fourteen events in four sports.
A sled-dog race was held at Lake Placid in 1932.
The death of Georgian luger Nodar Kumaritashvili in a training run on the day of the opening ceremonies resulted in the Whistler Sliding Centre changing the track layout on safety grounds.
Twenty-eight countries competed in Switzerland, but athletes from Germany and Japan were not invited.
These gifts included medical treatment for relatives, a college scholarship for one member's son and a land deal in Utah.
It became the first city to host a Winter Olympics twice.
There were two underlying reasons for this change: first was the television lobby's desire to maximise advertising revenue as it was difficult to sell advertising time for two Games in the same year;  second was the IOC's desire to gain more control over the revenue generated by the Games.
Fluctuating weather conditions challenged the hosts.
The IOC's website now treats Men's Military Patrol at the 1924 games as an event within the sport of Biathlon.
However, a change in provincial government brought in an administration which did not support the Olympic bid, so the offer was rejected.
Because of its role in World War II, Germany was not allowed to compete at the 1948 Winter Olympics.
The rest of the events were spread out over the Savoie.
This requires prospective host cities and the IOC, to plan with a view to the long-term economic and environmental impact that hosting the Olympics will have on the region.
Switzerland's neutrality had protected the town during World War II and most of the venues were in place from the 1928 Games, which made St. Moritz a logical choice.
The IOC agreed to provisionally accept the East German National Olympic Committee with the condition that East and West Germans compete on one team.
All of the mountain venues were  away in the alpine region known as Krasnaya Polyana.
Germany and Japan have been banned at times from competing in the Games.
The Squaw Valley Olympics had a number of notable firsts: it was the first Olympics to have a dedicated athletes' village, it was the first to use a computer (courtesy of IBM) to tabulate results, and the first to feature female speed skating events.
Because of the weather the 10,000&nbsp;metre speed-skating event had to be abandoned and officially cancelled.
To mitigate these concerns the IOC has enacted several initiatives.
Demonstration sports were discontinued after 1992.
The first Winter Games athlete to test positive for a banned substance was Alois Schloder, a West German hockey player, but his team was still allowed to compete.
Austrian Hermann Maier survived a crash during the downhill competition and returned to win gold in the super-g and the giant slalom.
They were hosted in the French Savoie region in the city of Albertville, though only 18 events were held in the city.
South Korean athletes won 10 medals, including 6 gold in the short-track speed skating events.
Juan Antonio Samaranch described Lillehammer as the best Olympic Winter Games ever in his closing ceremony speech.
The organising committee sold television rights for $2&nbsp;million, which was more than double the price of the broadcast rights for the Innsbruck Games.
When Brundage retired the IOC had $2&nbsp;million in assets; eight years later its accounts had swelled to $45&nbsp;million.
Although Innsbruck was a traditional winter sports resort, warm weather caused a lack of snow during the Games and the Austrian army was asked to transport snow and ice to the sport venues.
Although nothing strictly illegal had been done, the IOC feared that corporate sponsors would lose faith in the integrity of the process and that the Olympic brand would be tarnished to such an extent that advertisers would begin to pull their support.
They have pressured the IOC to include new events, such as snowboarding, that appeal to broader television audiences.
Prior to the Games the IOC agreed to allow China to compete in the Olympics for the first time since 1952.
Canada achieved an unprecedented double by winning both the men's and women's ice hockey gold medals.
The IOC sought to directly negotiate sponsorship contracts so that they had more control over the Olympic "brand".
In 1950 the IOC recognised the West German Olympic Committee, and invited East and West Germany to compete as a unified team at the 1952 Winter Games.
Since 1992 a number of new sports have been added to the Olympic programme; which include short track speed skating, snowboarding, freestyle and moguls skiing.
Ice stock sport, a German variant of curling, was demonstrated in 1936 in Germany and 1964 in Austria.
Alpine skiing made its Olympic debut, but skiing teachers were barred from entering because they were considered to be professionals.
Winter pentathlon, a variant of the modern pentathlon, was included as a demonstration event at the 1948 Games in Switzerland.
It created an income stream, via the sale of broadcast rights and advertising, which has become lucrative for the IOC.
The IOC has charged more for television broadcast rights at each successive Games.
Germany remained banned until 1925, and instead hosted a series of games called Deutsche Kampfspiele, starting with the Winter edition of 1922 (which predated the first Winter Olympics).
Frenchman Jean-Claude Killy became only the second person to win all the men's alpine skiing events.
In 1988, the Canadian city of Calgary hosted the first Winter Olympics to span 16&nbsp;days.
Seven months later she would earn a silver in track cycling at the Summer Games in Seoul, to become the only athlete to win medals in both a Summer and Winter Olympics in the same year.
Her medal total was equalled by Finnish ski jumper Matti Nykänen, who won all three events in his sport.
Hanni Wenzel won both the slalom and giant slalom and her country, Liechtenstein, became the smallest nation to produce an Olympic gold medallist.
The '''Winter Olympic Games''' (French: ''Jeux olympiques d'hiver'') is a major international sporting event that occurs once every four years.
The issue of professionalism became contentious during the Sapporo Games.
Over 2800 athletes from 88 countries participated in 98 events.
Bandy (Russian hockey) is a sport popular in the Nordic countries and Russia.
The Olympic flag presented at the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp was stolen, as was its replacement.
The 1976 Games featured the first combination bobsleigh and luge track, in neighbouring Igls.
The organisers claimed that the cost of extending the bullet train service from Tokyo to Nagano was responsible for the large price tag.
The Olympics resumed in 1948 and was again held every four years.
The 2014 Winter Olympics, officially the XXII Olympic Winter Games, or the 22nd Winter Olympics, took place from 7 to 23 February 2014.
It was not until the late 1980s that international sporting federations began to coordinate efforts to standardise the drug-testing protocols.
Sochi, Russia, was selected as the host city of the 2014 Winter Olympics over Salzburg, Austria, and Pyeongchang, South Korea.
New terms and age limits were established for IOC membership, and 15 former Olympic athletes were added to the committee.
Salt Lake City, a candidate for the 1972 Games, offered itself, but the IOC opted to ask Innsbruck, which had maintained most of the infrastructure from the 1964 Games.
Brundage's concerns proved prophetic.
Norway leads in terms of number of gold medals and overall number of medals.
The opening ceremony was held in a blizzard while warm weather conditions plagued sporting events throughout the rest of the Games.
In 1978 the United States Congress responded to these measures by passing legislation that reorganised the United States Olympic Committee.
The organising committee hoped that the exposure of the Olympic Games, and the expedited access to Nagano from Tokyo, would be a boon to the local economy for years afterward.
Unlike the Summer Olympics, the Winter Olympics feature sports practised on snow and ice.
East Germany declined the invitation and instead sought international legitimacy separate from West Germany.
The Austrian city of Innsbruck was the host in 1964.
Finally, cities bidding to host the Games are required to add a "legacy plan" to their proposal.
These were the first Winter Games to be televised and the first Olympics ever broadcast to an international audience, though no television rights would be sold until the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome.
The 1960 Winter Olympics marked the beginning of corporate sponsorship of the Games.
The next Winter Olympics was the first to be hosted outside of Europe.
This allowed outside interests, such as television companies and corporate sponsors, to exert influence.
The 1992 Games were the last to be held in the same year as the Summer Games.
In Vancouver the total number of medals won by athletes from Asia had increased to thirty-one, with eleven of them being gold.
The IOC turned to offer the Games to Vancouver-Garibaldi, British Columbia, which had been a candidate for the 1976 Games.
Skijöring, skiing behind dogs, was a demonstration sport in St. Moritz in 1928.
The Soviet Union won its fourth consecutive ice hockey gold medal.
Soon after the host city had been announced it was discovered that the organisers had engaged in an elaborate bribery scheme to curry favour with IOC officials.
The Cortina Games were used to test the feasibility of televising large sporting events.
Gifts and other financial considerations were given to those who would evaluate and vote on Salt Lake City's bid.
No city in the southern hemisphere has hosted or even been an applicant to host the Winter Olympics; the major challenge preventing one hosting the games is the dependence on winter weather, and the traditional February timing of the games falls in the middle of the southern hemisphere summer.
The Games were well-organised and displayed no indication of the war that would engulf the country eight years later.
The 1976 Winter Olympics had been awarded in 1970 to Denver, United States, but in November 1972 the voters of the state of Colorado voted against public funding of the games by a 3 to 2 margin.
During the 1970s testing outside of competition was escalated because it was found to deter athletes from using performance-enhancing drugs.
For the first time the speed skating events were held indoors, on the Olympic Oval.
German Georg Hackl won a silver in the singles luge, becoming the first athlete in Olympic history to win medals in the same individual event in five consecutive Olympics.
The addition of these events has broadened the appeal of the Winter Olympics beyond Europe and North America.
At the opening ceremonies the final torch bearer, Guido Caroli, entered the Olympic Stadium on ice skates.
The host city for the XXIV Olympic Winter Games, also known as the 2022 Winter Olympics, is Beijing, elected on 31 July 2015, at the 128th IOC Session in Kuala Lumpur.
Even IOC president Juan Antonio Samaranch received two rifles valued at $2,000.
The problem with testing during this time was a lack of standardisation of the test procedures, which undermined the credibility of the tests.
It was demonstrated at the Oslo Games.
The IOC has had to address several criticisms, internal scandals, the use of performance-enhancing drugs by Winter Olympians, as well as a political boycott of the Winter Olympics.
The Olympic Village and Olympic Stadium were located on the Black Sea coast.
Twelve countries &ndash; Austria, Canada, Finland, France, Great Britain, Hungary, Italy, Norway, Poland, Sweden, Switzerland and the United States &ndash; have sent athletes to every Winter Olympic Games.
A wave of new world records were set in speed skating because of the introduction of the clap skate.
Despite numerous appeals and court hearings the IOC's decision stood.
The bobsleigh events were absent for the only time, because the organising committee found it too expensive to build the bobsleigh run.
Soviet athletes who won gold medals could expect to receive between $4,000 and $8,000 depending on the prestige of the sport.
Canada became embroiled with Russia in a controversy that involved the judging of the pairs figure skating competition.
First it has agreed to fund part of the host city's budget for staging the Games.
The IOC took the lead in the fight against steroids when it established the independent World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) in November 1999.
According to the IOC, the host city is responsible for, "...establishing functions and services for all aspects of the Games, such as sports planning, venues, finance, technology, accommodation, catering, media services etc., as well as operations during the Games."
As he skated around the stadium his skate caught on a cable and he fell, nearly extinguishing the flame.
The more television companies have paid to televise the Games, the greater their persuasive power has been with the IOC.
While European powers such as Norway and Germany still dominate the traditional Winter Olympic sports, countries such as South Korea, Australia and Canada are finding success in the new sports.
The IOC was attempting to accommodate China, who wished to compete using the same name and anthem that had been used by Taiwan.
The 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin became notable for a scandal involving the emerging trend of blood doping, the use of blood transfusions or synthetic hormones such as Erythropoietin (EPO) to improve oxygen flow and thus reduce fatigue.
Because of this decision the Swiss and Austrian skiers refused to compete at the Games.
This event followed the pre-Olympics suspension of 12 cross-country skiers who tested positive for unusually high levels of haemoglobin, which is evidence of blood doping.
The organisers claimed this was required to accommodate technological advances.
Chiharu Igaya won the first Winter Olympics medal for Japan and the continent of Asia, when he placed second in the slalom.
The first Olympics after the war, the 1920 Summer Olympics, were held in Antwerp, Belgium, and featured figure skating and an ice hockey tournament.
New Zealand skier Annelise Coberger became the first Winter Olympic medallist from the southern hemisphere when she won a silver medal in the women's slalom.
American speed-skater Eric Heiden set either an Olympic or world record in each of the five events he competed in.
The judging broke along Cold War lines with judges from former Communist countries favouring the Russian pair and judges from Western nations voting for the Canadians.
Irina Rodnina, three-time Olympic gold medallist in figure skating, was awarded the Order of Lenin after her victory at the 1976 Winter Olympics in Innsbruck.
World War II interrupted the celebrations of the Winter Olympics.
Three years later, Italian count Eugenio Brunetta d'Usseaux proposed that the IOC stage a week of winter sports included as part of the 1912 Summer Olympics in Stockholm, Sweden.
The IOC renamed the island "Chinese Taipei" and demanded that it adopt a different flag and national anthem, stipulations that Taiwan would not agree to.
Johann Olav Koss of Norway won three gold medals, coming first in all of the distance speed skating events.
Host nation Yugoslavia won its first Olympic medal when alpine skier Jure Franko won a silver in the giant slalom.
It was decided that staggering the Games would make it easier for corporations to sponsor individual Olympic Games, which would maximise revenue potential.
At 16&nbsp;years old, Finnish ski jumper Toni Nieminen made history by becoming the youngest male Winter Olympic champion.
Three days before the Games IOC president Avery Brundage threatened to bar a number of alpine skiers from competing because they participated in a ski camp at Mammoth Mountain in the United States.
Until 1980 the island of Taiwan had been competing under the name "Republic of China" (ROC) and had been using the ROC flag and anthem.
Canada and the United States, with their many NHL players, were favoured to win the tournament.
Sapporo, Japan, and Gothenburg, Sweden, were front-runners to host the 1984 Winter Olympics.
The success of Asian countries stood in stark contrast to the under-performing Russian team, with Vancouver marking a high point for medals won by Asian countries.
China was given permission to compete as the "People's Republic of China" (PRC) and to use the PRC flag and anthem.
St. Moritz was selected to host the first post-war Games in 1948.
The only exception was the French judge, Marie-Reine Le Gougne, who awarded the gold to the Russians.
Claudia Pechstein of Germany became the first speed skater to earn nine career medals.
The special figures figure skating event was only contested at the 1908 Summer Olympics.
This has been done to boost ratings, which were slowly declining until the 2010 Games.
Chamonix was chosen to host this "week" (actually 11&nbsp;days) of events.
They were led by Hjalmar Andersen who won three gold medals in four events in the speed skating competition.
The 2002 Winter Olympics were held in Salt Lake City, United States, hosting 77 nations and 2,399 athletes in 78 events in 7 sports.
New events were added in ski-jumping and speed skating; while future Olympic sports curling, short track speed skating and freestyle skiing made their appearance as demonstration sports.
It also approved financial rewards to medal-winning athletes.
A total of 49 nations and 1,272 athletes participated in 39 events.
After the division of Czechoslovakia in 1993 the Czech Republic and Slovakia made their Olympic debuts.
The first boycott of a Winter Olympics occurred in 1980 when Taiwan refused to participate after an edict by the IOC mandated that they change their name and national anthem.
The 1972 Winter Games, held in Sapporo, Japan, were the first to be hosted outside North America or Europe.
The Winter Olympics has been hosted on three continents by eleven different countries.
The IOC awarded the 1960 Olympics to Squaw Valley, United States.
In 1967 the IOC began enacting drug testing protocols.
Despite Brundage's strenuous resistance the commercialisation of the Games continued during the 1960s, and revenue generated by corporate sponsorship swelled the IOC's coffers.
