Belief in witchcraft has been shown to have similarities in societies throughout the world.
About eighty people throughout England's Massachusetts Bay Colony were accused of practicing witchcraft; thirteen women and two men were executed in a witch-hunt that lasted throughout New England from 1645–1663.
If the holy river declares him innocent and he remains unharmed the man who laid the spell shall be put to death.
At one point during the Würzburg trials of 1629, children made up 60% of those accused, although this had declined to 17% by the end of the year.
In a majority of the cases, it is difficult for the accused woman to reach out for help and she is forced to either abandon her home and family or driven to commit suicide.
Also in 2007, Abdul Hamid Bin Hussain Bin Moustafa al-Fakki, a Sudanese national, was sentenced to death after being convicted of producing a spell that would lead to the reconciliation of a divorced couple.
Such, for example, were nocturnal riding through the air, the changing of a person's disposition from love to hate, the control of thunder, rain, and sunshine, the transformation of a man into an animal, the intercourse of incubi and succubi with human beings and other such superstitions.
Reports indicate this practice of witch hunting has in some places evolved into "something more malignant, sadistic and voyeuristic."
She died in prison.
The Bemba people believed misfortunes such as wartings, hauntings and famines to be just actions sanctioned by the High-God Lesa.
For example, in June 2013, four women were accused of witchcraft because the family "had a 'permanent house' made of wood, and the family had tertiary educations and high social standing".
The accusations of witchcraft are, in this case, considered to have been a pretext for Hermann to get rid of an "unsuitable match", Veronika being born into the lower nobility and thus "unworthy" of his son.
The work of Thomas Aquinas in the 13th century was instrumental in developing the new theology which would give rise to the witch hunts, but because sorcery was judged by secular courts it was not until ''maleficium'' was identified with heresy that theological trials for witchcraft could commence.
In 1484, Pope Innocent VIII issued ''Summis desiderantes affectibus'', a Papal bull authorizing the "correcting, imprisoning, punishing and chastising" of devil-worshippers who have "slain infants", among other crimes.
However, Pope Nicholas I (866), prohibited the use of torture altogether, and a similar decree may be found in the Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals.
In parts of Southern Africa, several hundred people have been killed in witch hunts since 1990.
In November 2010, the Supreme Court refused to ratify the death sentence, stating that there was insufficient evidence that his actions had harmed others.
Learned European ideas about witchcraft, demonological ideas, strongly influenced the hunt of witches in the North.
, the first of 17 people executed for witchcraft in the Colonies from 1647 to 1663.
The Lombard code of 643 states:
The act was finally repealed in 1951.
A black man can be convicted with merely an accusation.
The witch hunts in Jalpaiguri are less known, but are motivated by the stress in the tea industry on the lives of the adivasi workers.
Three years later in 1487, Kramer and Sprenger published the notorious ''Malleus Maleficarum'' (the 'Hammer against the Witches') which, because of the newly invented printing presses, enjoyed a wide readership.
Strabo, Gaius Maecenas and Cassius Dio all reiterate the traditional Roman opposition against sorcery and divination, and Tacitus used the term ''religio-superstitio'' to class these outlawed observances.
The first such use reported by the ''Oxford English Dictionary'' dates to 1932.
The term is used by Orwell to describe how, in the Spanish Civil War, political persecutions became a regular occurrence.
On many different occasions, ecclesiastics who spoke with authority did their best to disabuse the people of their superstitious belief in witchcraft.
He that plunged into the river shall take possession of the house of him who laid the spell upon him."
The leader of the witch hunt, often a prominent figure in the community or a "witch doctor",  may also gain economic benefit by charging for an exorcism or by selling body parts of the murdered.
They were eventually executed by the secular arm.
King Kálmán (Coloman) of Hungary, in Decree 57 of his First Legislative Book (published in 1100), banned witch hunting because he said, "witches do not exist".
'''Southern Europe''' (Spain, Portugal and Italy)
Magic was not considered to be wrong because it failed, but because it worked effectively for the wrong reasons.
Janet Horne was executed for witchcraft in Scotland in 1727.
There the unclean spirits, who beheld them as they wandered through the wilderness, bestowed their embraces upon them and begat this savage race, which dwelt at first in the swamps, a stunted, foul and puny tribe, scarcely human, and having no language save one which bore but slight resemblance to human speech."
After white rule of Africa, beliefs in sorcery and witchcraft grew, possibly because of the social strain caused by new ideas, customs and laws, and also because the courts no longer allowed witches to be tried.
Bernardino's sermons reveal both a phenomenon of superstitious practices and an over-reaction against them by the common people.
1520), Johannes Wier (1515–1588), Reginald Scot (1538–1599), Cornelius Loos (1546–1595), Anton Praetorius (1560–1613), Alonso Salazar y Frías (1564–1636), Friedrich Spee (1591–1635), and Balthasar Bekker (1634–1698).
These doctrinal shifts were completed in the mid 15th century, specifically in the wake of the Council of Basel and centered on the Duchy of Savoy in the western Alps, leading to an early series of witch trials by both secular and ecclesiastical courts in the second half of the 15th century.
The total number of witch trials in Europe which are known to have ended in executions is around 12,000.
Pope Gregory VII, in 1080, wrote to King Harald III of Denmark forbidding witches to be put to death upon presumption of their having caused storms or failure of crops or pestilence.
Both women have been identified as the last person executed for witchcraft in Europe, but in both cases, the official verdict did not mention witchcraft, as this had ceased to be recognized as a criminal offense.
A 2010 estimate places the number of women killed as witches in India at between 150 and 200 per year, or a total of 2,500 in the period of 1995 to 2009.
Christian IV of Denmark, in particular, encouraged this practice, and hundreds of people were convicted of witchcraft and burnt.
In the case of the Madonna Oriente, the Inquisition of Milan was not sure what to do with two women who in 1384 confessed to have participated the society around Signora Oriente or Diana.
Witch-hunts against children were reported by the BBC in 1999 in the Congo and in Tanzania, where the government responded to attacks on women accused of being witches for having red eyes.
These were also condemned by several Church Fathers.
The case and the associated media coverage has been frequently termed a witch-hunt by commentators and social researchers.
In recent times, the term "social media witch hunt" has been used to describe mass public shaming driven by viral sharing on social media.
The bamucapi utilised a mixture of Christian and native religious traditions to account for their powers and said that God (not specifying which God) helped them to prepare their medicine.
In India, labeling a woman as a witch is a common ploy to grab land, settle scores or even to punish her for turning down sexual advances.
Through their confessions, both of them conveyed the traditional folk beliefs of white magic.
give over the horn containers for curses and evil potions to the witch-finders.
Amongst the Bantu tribes of Southern Africa, the witch smellers were responsible for detecting witches.
The last known official witch-trial was the Doruchów witch trial in Poland in 1783.
The Pendle witch trials of 1612 are among the most famous witch trials in English history.
The belief in magic and divination, and attempts to use magic to influence personal well-being (to increase life, win love, etc.)
Most of the accused are women and children but can also be elderly people or marginalised groups of the community such as albinos and the HIV-infected.
On 29 and 30 June 2015, militants of the Salafi jihadist extremist group Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL or ISIS) beheaded two "witches" with their husbands on accusations of "sorcery" and using "magic for medicine" in Deir ez-Zor province of the self-proclaimed Islamic State.
Deuteronomy 18:10–12 states "No one shall be found among you who makes a son or daughter pass through fire, who practices divination, or is a soothsayer, or an augur, or a sorcerer, or one that casts spells, or who consults ghosts or spirits, or who seeks oracles from the dead.
These witches would then have to "yield up his horns"; i.e.
In 331 BC, 170 women were executed as witches in the context of an epidemic illness.
The only country where witchcraft remains legally punishable by death is Saudi Arabia.
If the holy river overcome him and he is drowned, the man who put the spell upon him shall take possession of his house.
The women were accused again in 1390, and condemned by the inquisitor.
Other examples include an Irish synod in 800, and a sermon by Agobard of Lyons (810).
A Catholic figure who preached against witchcraft was popular Franciscan preacher, Bernardino of Siena (1380–1444).
There is no way to verify the figures reported by Roman historians, but if they are taken at face value, the scale of the witch-hunts in the Roman Republic in relation to the population of Italy at the time far exceeded anything that took place during the "classical" witch-craze in Early Modern Europe.
Use of the term was popularized in the United States in the context of the McCarthyist search for communists during the Cold War, which was discredited partly through being compared to the Salem witch trials.
Witch-hunts in North America began about the time of Hopkins.
They dressed in European clothing, and would summon the headman to prepare a ritual meal for the village.
In Germany the last death sentence was that of Anna Schwegelin in Kempten in 1775 (although not carried out).
In A.D. 354, whilst Tiberius Claudius was emperor, 45 men and 85 women, who were all suspected of sorcery, were executed.
The lynchings are particularly common in the poor northern states of Jharkhand, Bihar and the central state of Chhattisgarh.
Two unnamed women were executed in Poznań, Poland, in 1793, in proceedings of dubious legitimacy.
The last executions for witchcraft in England had taken place in 1682, when Temperance Lloyd, Mary Trembles, and Susanna Edwards were executed at Exeter.
But he altogether rejected the possibility of many of the alleged powers with which witches were popularly credited.
It was reported on 21 May 2008 that in Kenya a mob had burnt to death at least 11 people accused of witchcraft.
This mild approach represented the view of the Church for many centuries.
Witchcraft persecution spread to all areas of Europe, including Scotland and the northernmost periphery of Europe in Northern Norway.
The book was soon banned by the Church in 1490, and Kramer and Sprenger censured, but it was nevertheless reprinted in 14 editions by 1520 and became unduly influential in the secular courts.
It’s estimated about 150 cases of violence and killings are occurring each year in just the province of Simbu in Papua New Guinea alone.
It presents a framework to explain the occurrence of otherwise random misfortunes such as sickness or death, and the witch sorcerer provides an image of evil.
When the villagers arrived they would view them all in a mirror, and claimed they could identify witches with this method.
For example, in the History Channel documentary ''America: The Story of Us'', narrator Liev Schreiber explains that "the search for runaway slaves becomes a witch hunt.
In the district of Finnmark, Northern Norway, severe witchcraft trials took place during the period 1600-1692.
The frequency of prosecutions for this in the country as whole is unknown.
Witch hunts still occur today in societies where belief in magic is prevalent.
Livy records that this persecution was because "''there was nothing wicked, nothing flagitious, that had not been practiced among them''"  Consequent to the ban, in 184 BC, about 2,000 people were executed for witchcraft (''veneficium''), and in 182–180 BC another 3,000 executions took place, again triggered by the outbreak of an epidemic.
The term is used when a hunt for wrongdoers becomes abused, and a defendant can be convicted merely on an accusation.
A comparable situation in Russia is suggested in a sermon by  Serapion of Vladimir (written in 1274/5), where the popular superstition of witches causing crop failures is denounced.
More generally the societal reaction to child sexual abuse has been criticized as a witch-hunt by some academics and commentators since the early 1990s.
When something went wrong, no one questioned the ministers or the power of the witchcraft.
Modern scholarly estimates place the total number of executions for witchcraft in the 300-year period of European witch-hunts in the five digits, mostly at roughly between 40,000 and 50,000 (see table below for details), but some estimate there were 200,000 to 500,000 executed for witchcraft, and others estimated 1,000,000 or more.
The general desire of the Catholic Church's clergy to check fanaticism about witchcraft and necromancy is shown in the decrees of the Council of Paderborn, which, in 785, explicitly outlawed condemning people as witches and condemned to death anyone who burnt a witch.
Arthur Miller's ''The Crucible'' is notable for using the Salem Witch Trials as an extended simile for McCarthyism.
The main causes of witchcraft related violence include widespread belief in superstition, lack of education, lack of public awareness, illiteracy, caste system, male domination, and economic dependency of women on men.
From the 1960s, the term was in wide use and could also be applied to isolated incidents or scandals, specifically public smear-campaigns against individuals.
A lawsuit was launched in 2001 in Ghana, where witch-hunts are also common, by a woman accused of being a witch.
Reports by UN agencies, Amnesty International, Oxfam and anthropologists show that "attacks on accused sorcerers and witches – sometimes men, but most commonly women – are frequent, ferocious and often fatal."
In modern terminology 'witch-hunt' has acquired usage referring to the act of seeking and persecuting any perceived enemy, particularly when the search is conducted using extreme measures and with little regard to actual guilt or innocence.
The first major persecution in Europe, when witches were caught, tried, convicted, and burned in the imperial lordship of Wiesensteig in southwestern Germany, is recorded in 1563 in a pamphlet called "True and Horrifying Deeds of 63 Witches".
Witch-hunts first appeared in large numbers in southern France and Switzerland during the 14th and 15th centuries.
Cameroon has re-established witchcraft-accusations in courts after its independence in 1967.
In 2009, Ali Sibat, a Lebanese television presenter who had been arrested whilst on a pilgrimage in Saudi Arabia, was sentenced to death for witchcraft arising out of his fortune-telling on an Arab satellite channel.
In 451 BC, the Twelve Tables of Roman law had provisions against evil incantations and spells intended to damage cereal crops.
In England, the Witchcraft Act of 1542 regulated the penalties for witchcraft.
Witch-hunts in Africa are often led by relatives seeking the property of the accused victim.
Anna Göldi was executed in Glarus, Switzerland in 1782 and Barbara Zdunk in Prussia in 1811.
Witch hunts in modern times are continuously reported by the UNHCR of the UNO as a massive violation of human rights.
The Salem witch trials followed in 1692–93.
The villagers related that the witch-finders were always right because the witches they found were always the people whom the village had feared all along.
Witch-hunts were seen across early modern Europe, but the most significant area of witch-hunting in modern Europe is often considered to be central and southern Germany.
The victims of this form of violence are often beaten, tortured, publicly humiliated, and murdered.
In 2010, Sarwa Dev Prasad Ojha, minister for women and social welfare, said, "Superstitions are deeply rooted in our society, and the belief in witchcraft is one of the worst forms of this."
Most cases are not documented because it is difficult for poor and illiterate women to travel from isolated regions to file police reports.
On 21 May 2009, ''The New York Times'' reported that the alleged witch-hunting campaign had been sparked by the Gambian President, Yahya Jammeh.
One study finds that witchcraft beliefs are associated with antisocial attitudes: lower levels of trust, charitable giving and group participation.
are human cultural universals.
These victims are often considered burdens to the community, and as a result are often driven out, starved to death, or killed violently, sometimes by their own families in acts of social cleansing.
Current scholarly estimates of the number of people executed for witchcraft vary between about 40,000 and 100,000.
The wide distribution of the practice of witch-hunts in geographically and culturally separated societies (Europe, Africa, India, New Guinea) since the 1960s has triggered interest in the anthropological background of this behaviour.
Witchcraft was a normal part of everyday life.
The response by the populace to the ''kɛmamɔi'' is that "they valued his work and would learn the lessons he came to teach them, about social responsibility and cooperation."
All of the women were tortured and Helen Rumbali was beheaded.
Another early instance is George Orwell's ''Homage to Catalonia'' (1938).
The only agency which caused unjust harm was a witch, who had enormous powers and was hard to detect.
117) criticizing the irrationality and social injustice in treating elderly and feeble women (dubbed Moll White) as witches.
The Council of Frankfurt in 794, called by Charlemagne, was also very explicit in condemning "the persecution of alleged witches and wizards", calling the belief in witchcraft "superstitious", and ordering the death penalty for those who presumed to burn witches.
In addition, there are some countries that have legislation against the practice of sorcery.
In England and Scotland between 1542 and 1735, a series of Witchcraft Acts enshrined into law the punishment (often with death, sometimes with incarceration) of individuals practising or claiming to practice witchcraft and magic.
+ Approximate statistics on the number of trials for witchcraft and executions in various regions of Europe in the period 1450–1750:
The causes of witch hunts include poverty, epidemics, social crises and lack of education.
Richards noted that the bamucapi created the sense of danger in the villages by rounding up ''all'' the horns in the village, whether they were used for anti-witchcraft charms, potions, snuff or were indeed receptacles of black magic.
The resurgence of witch-hunts at the end of the medieval period, taking place with at least partial support or at least tolerance on the part of the Church, was accompanied with a number of developments in Christian doctrine, for example the recognition of the existence of witchcraft as a form of Satanic influence and its classification as a heresy.
Though the practice of "white" magic (such as faith healing) is legal in Papua, the 1976 Sorcery Act imposed a penalty of up to 2 years in prison for the practice of "black" magic, until the Act was repealed in 2013.
At America's first witch trial, Hugh was found innocent, while Mary was acquitted of witchcraft but sentenced to be hanged for the death of her child.
In 186 BC, the Roman senate issued a decree severely restricting the Bacchanals, ecstatic rites celebrated in honor of Dionysus.
This, for instance, is the general purport of the book, ''Contra insulsam vulgi opinionem de grandine et tonitruis'' ("Against the foolish belief of the common sort concerning hail and thunder"), written by Agobard (d. 841), Archbishop of Lyons.
This law banned the trading and possession of harmful drugs and poisons, possession of magical books and other occult paraphernalia.
'''Central & Eastern Europe''' (Poland-Lithuania, Hungary and Russia)
The "Decretum" of Burchard, Bishop of Worms (about 1020), and especially its 19th book, often known separately as the "Corrector", is another work of great importance.
Early secular laws against witchcraft include those promulgated by King Athelstan (924–939):
It is used whether or not it is sanctioned by the government, or merely occurs within the "court of public opinion".
But if he will deny it, and at threefold ordeal shall be guilty; that he be 120 days in prison: and after that let kindred take him out, and give to the king 120 shillings, and pay the wer to his kindred, and enter into borh for him, that he evermore desist from the like.
Another very similar situation occurred to Muree bin Ali bin Issa al-Asiri and he was beheaded on 19 June 2012 in the Najran Province.
Persecution of witches continued in the Roman Empire until the late 4th century AD and abated only after the introduction of Christianity as the Roman state religion in the 390s.
Another study finds that income shocks (caused by extreme rainfall) lead to a large increase in the murder of "witches" in Tanzania.
Jane Wenham was among the last subjects of a typical witch trial in England in 1712, but was pardoned after her conviction and set free.
Witch hunts are also taking place among the tea garden workers in Jalpaiguri, West Bengal India.
Earlier on, the ISIL militants beheaded several "magicians" and street illusionists in Syria, Iraq and Libya.
Witch hunts in Nepal are common, and are targeted especially against low-caste women.
Judges are paid ten dollars to rule them as slaves, five to set them free."
Few incidents are ever reported, according to the 2012 Law Reform Commission which concluded that they have increased since the 1980s.
According to Human Rights Watch in 2009, prosecutions for witchcraft and sorcery are proliferating and "Saudi courts are sanctioning a literal witch hunt by the religious police."
The majority of those accused were from the lower economic classes in European society, although in rarer cases high-ranking individuals were accused as well.
These emotions and motivations cause people to act antisocially".
The emperor Augustus strengthened legislation aimed at curbing these practices, for instance in 31 B.C., by burning every magical book in Rome, ''more than 2000 of them'', except for certain portions of the hallowed Sibylline Books.
In 2009, the government reports that extrajudicial torture and murder of alleged witches – usually lone women – are spreading from the highland areas to cities as villagers migrate to urban areas.
In some prosecutions for witchcraft, torture (permitted by the Roman civil law) apparently took place.
The 1735 Act continued to be used until the 1940s to prosecute individuals such as spiritualists and Gypsies.
In addition, all witches who did not attend the meal to be identified would be called to account later on by their master, who had risen from the dead, and who would force the witches by means of drums to go to the graveyard, where they would die.
After an appeal court had cast doubt on the validity of the death sentence because the confession had been retracted, the lower court reaffirmed the same sentence on a different basis.
While it appears to be the case that the clear majority of victims in Germany were women, in other parts of Europe the witch-hunts targeted primarily men, thus in Iceland 92-percent of the accused were men, in Estonia 60-percent, and in Moscow two-thirds of those accused were male.
:"found among his people certain witches, whom he called in his native tongue ''Haliurunnae''.
The bamucapi then made all drink a potion called ''kucapa'' which would cause a witch to die and swell up if he ever tried such things again.
For whoever does these things is abhorrent to the Lord;" and Exodus 22:18 prescribes "thou shalt not suffer a witch to live"; tales like that of 1&nbsp;Samuel 28, reporting how Saul "hath cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land" suggest that in practice sorcery could at least lead to exile.
Burchard was writing against the superstitious belief in magical potions, for instance, that may produce impotence or abortion.
Neither were these the only examples of an effort to prevent unjust suspicion to which such poor creatures might be exposed.
Reports on indigenous practices in the Americas, Asia and Africa collected during the early modern age of exploration have been taken to suggest that not just the belief in witchcraft but also the periodic outbreak of witch-hunts are a human cultural universal.
became an important source of late medieval and early modern European law on witchcraft.
Witches were often called for, along with religious ministers, to help the ill or to deliver a baby.
In Sierra Leone, the witch-hunt is an occasion for a sermon by the ''kɛmamɔi'' (native Mende witch-finder) on social ethics : "Witchcraft ... takes hold in people’s lives when people are less than fully open-hearted.
In 1711, Joseph Addison published an article in the highly respected ''The Spectator'' journal (No.
And we have ordained respecting witch-crafts, and ''lybacs'' ''read ''lyblac'' "sorcery"'', and ''morthdaeds "murder, mortal sin"'': if any one should be thereby killed, and he could not deny it, that he be liable in his life.
In the North Berwick witch trials in Scotland, over 70 people were accused of witchcraft on account of bad weather when James VI of Scotland, who shared the Danish king's interest in witch trials, sailed to Denmark in 1590 to meet his betrothed Anne of Denmark.
Number of executions
He did so at the request of two inquisitors, Heinrich Kramer and Jacob Sprenger, members of the Dominican Order, who had been refused permission by the local bishops in Germany to investigate.
In Denmark, the burning of witches increased following the reformation of 1536.
Often the outrage arises over a misunderstanding of the actions or intents of the accused.
:"If a man has put a spell upon another man and it is not yet justified, he upon whom the spell is laid shall go to the holy river; into the holy river shall he plunge.
On the basis of this evidence, Scarre and Callow asserted that the "typical witch was the wife or widow of an agricultural labourer or small tenant farmer, and she was well known for a quarrelsome and aggressive nature."
In most cases, these are instances of lynching and burnings, reported with some regularity from much of Sub-Saharan Africa, from rural North India and from Papua New Guinea.
The Hebrew Bible condemns sorcery.
In other parts of Europe, the practice died down later.
Less than 2 percent of those accused of witch-hunting are actually convicted, according to a study by the Free Legal Aid Committee, a group that works with victims in the state of Jharkhand.
However, historians such as Ludwig von Pastor insist that the bull neither allowed anything new nor was necessarily binding on Catholic consciences.
On 12 December 2011, Amina bint Abdulhalim Nassar was beheaded in Al Jawf Province after being convicted of practicing witchcraft and sorcery.
This conforms to the teachings of the Canon Episcopi of circa 900 AD (alleged to date from 314 AD), which, following the thoughts of Augustine of Hippo, stated that witchcraft did not exist and that to teach that it was a reality was, itself, false and heterodox teaching.
Suspecting these women, he expelled them from the midst of his race and compelled them to wander in solitary exile afar from his army.
The claim that "millions of witches" (often: "nine million witches") were killed in Europe occasionally found in popular literature is spurious, and ultimately due to a 1791 pamphlet by Gottfried Christian Voigt.
The final Act of 1735 led to prosecution for fraud rather than witchcraft since it was no longer believed that the individuals had actual supernatural powers or traffic with Satan.
However, it is clear that Bernardino had in mind not merely the use of spells and enchantments and such like fooleries but much more serious crimes, chiefly murder and infanticide.
The peak years of witch-hunts in southwest Germany were from 1561 to 1670.
In the Judaean Second Temple period, Rabbi Simeon ben Shetach in the 1st century BC is reported to have sentenced to death eighty women who had been charged with witchcraft on a single day in Ashkelon.
A memorial of international format, ''Steilneset Memorial'', has been built to commemorate the victims of the Finnmark witchcraft trials.
The Councils of Elvira (306), Ancyra (314), and Trullo (692) imposed certain ecclesiastical penances for devil-worship.
This is clear from his much-quoted sermon of 1427, in which he says:
In a notorious case in 1425, Hermann II, Count of Celje accused his daughter in law Veronika of Desenice of witchcraft – and, though she was acquitted by the court, he had her drowned.
