However, even at a later date, not all witches were assumed to be harmful practicers of the craft.
European pagan belief in witchcraft was associated with the goddess Diana and dismissed as "diabolical fantasies" by medieval Christian authors.
The concept of witchcraft and the belief in its existence have existed throughout recorded history.
Interest was intensified, however, by Gerald Gardner's claim in 1954 in ''Witchcraft Today'' that a form of witchcraft still existed in England.
Scientifically, the existence of magical powers and witchcraft are generally believed to lack credence and to be unsupported by high quality experimental testing, although individual witchcraft practices and effects may be open to scientific explanation or explained via mentalism and psychology.
In 820 the Bishop of Lyon and others repudiated the belief that witches could make bad weather, fly in the night, and change their shape.
Other individual practitioners and writers such as Paul Huson also claimed inheritance to surviving traditions of witchcraft.
Disbelief in the miracles of the Prophets is considered an act of disbelief; belief in the miracles of any given pious individual is not.
Witches are associated with harm to the community and transgression of societal standards, especially those relating to family and the dead.
Although these two methods of torture were used in the west and the east, Russia implemented a system of fines payable for the crime of witchcraft during the seventeenth century.
The four sessions of the Superior Court of Judicature in 1693, held in Salem Town, but also in Ipswich, Boston, and Charlestown, produced only 3 convictions in the 31 witchcraft trials it conducted.
The thirteenth-century bishop of Vladimir, Serapion Vladimirskii, preached sermons throughout the Muscovite countryside, and in one particular sermon revealed that burning was the usual punishment for witchcraft, but more often the cold water test was used as a precursor to execution.
This is reflected in linguistics; there are numerous words for a variety of practitioners of paganism-based healers.
"Witchcraft ... deserves respect ... it can embellish or redeem (''ketula evo vuukisa'')."
Another frequent term is колдунья (koldun'ya), ''sorcerer'' being колдун (koldun).
According to British Traditional Witch Michael Howard, the term refers to "any non-Gardnerian, non-Alexandrian, non-Wiccan or pre-modern form of the Craft, especially if it has been inspired by historical forms of witchcraft and folk magic".
Differing regional beliefs set those who use foxes into two separate types: the ''kitsune-mochi'', and the ''tsukimono-suji''.
Around 750 people were killed as witches in Assam and West Bengal between 2003 and 2008.
Also in the Qur'an, chapter of Jinn:
The ruqya contains verses of the Qur'an as well as prayers specifically targeted against demons.
His goal was to divert suspicion away from male homosociality among the elite, and focus fear on female communities and large gatherings of women.
Nineteen of the accused, 14 women and 5 men, were hanged.
Girdle-measurers specialised in diagnosing ailments caused by fairies, while magical cures for more mundane ailments, such as burns or toothache, could be had from charmers.)
Some of the camps are thought to have been set up over 100 years ago.
Such families are respected and feared, but are also openly shunned.
The Church did not invent the idea of witchcraft as a potentially harmful force whose practitioners should be put to death.
She died in prison.
The ''inyanga'''s job is to heal illness and injury and provide customers with magical items for everyday use.
She was also not seen as a model citizen because her husband was in Venice.
Accusations of witchcraft were often combined with other charges of heresy against such groups as the Cathars and Waldensians.
(Other folk magicians had their own purviews.
Cassandra from Ferrara, Italy, was still considered a foreigner because not native to Rome where she was residing.
They have been present or central at various times, and in many diverse forms, among cultures and religions worldwide, including both "primitive" and "highly advanced" cultures, and continue to have an important role in many cultures today.
The New Testament condemns the practice as an abomination, just as the Old Testament had (Galatians 5:20, compared with Revelation 21:8; 22:15; and Acts 8:9; 13:6), though the overall topic of Biblical law in Christianity is still disputed.
Suspicion of modern medicine due to beliefs about illness being due to witchcraft also continues in many countries to this day, with tragic healthcare consequences.
In 1645, Springfield, Massachusetts, experienced America's first accusations of witchcraft when husband and wife Hugh and Mary Parsons accused each other of witchcraft.
The first Neopagan groups to publicly appear, during the 1950s and 60s, were Gerald Gardner's Bricket Wood coven and Roy Bowers' Clan of Tubal Cain.
While these customs were unique to Russian culture, they were not exclusive to this region.
Thirteen women and two men were executed in a witch-hunt that lasted throughout New England from 1645–1663.
Such people described their contacts with fairies, spirits often involving out-of-body experiences and travelling through the realms of an "other-world".
Within her Order, she emphasised that her followers discover their own personal relationship with the angelic beings, including Lumiel.
All 26 who went to trial before this court were convicted.
Part of an ancient pagan marriage tradition involved the bride taking a ritual bath at a bathhouse before the ceremony.
Wicca is now practised as a religion of an initiatory secret society nature with positive ethical principles, organised into autonomous covens and led by a High Priesthood.
The biblical Witch of Endor performed it (1 Sam.
The term "witch doctor" was in use in England before it came to be associated with Africa.
Among the Catholics, Protestants, and secular leadership of the European Late Medieval/Early Modern period, fears about witchcraft rose to fever pitch and sometimes led to large-scale witch-hunts.
Such accusations are a counterpart to blood libel of various kinds, which may be found throughout history across the globe.
The Bible provides some evidence that these commandments against sorcery were enforced under the Hebrew kings:
In April 2008, in Kinshasa, the police arrested 14 suspected victims (of penis snatching) and sorcerers accused of using black magic or witchcraft to steal (make disappear) or shrink men's penises to extort cash for cure, amid a wave of panic.
Note that the Hebrew word ''ob'', translated as ''familiar spirit'' in the above quotation, has a different meaning than the usual English sense of the phrase; namely, it refers to a spirit that the woman is familiar with, rather than to a spirit that physically manifests itself in the shape of an animal.
However, as the witchcraft-trial craze swept across Catholic and Protestant countries during this time, Orthodox Christian Europe indeed partook in this so-called "witch hysteria."
Ritual centered on harvest of the crops and the location of the sun was very important.
Okeja argues that witchcraft in Africa today plays a very different social role than in Europe of the past—or present—and should be understood through an African rather than post-colonial Western lens.
In Mexico City, people who practice brujería, santería, vodoo, ocultism and magic may find items, herbs and supplies at the ''mercado de Sonora''.
Both men and women are equally termed "witches."
, between 25,000 and 50,000 children in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo, had been accused of witchcraft and thrown out of their homes.
Accusations of witchcraft and wizardry led to the prosecution of a man in Tennessee as recently as 1833.
Other severe medical conditions whose treatment is hampered in this way include tuberculosis, leprosy, epilepsy and the common severe bacterial Buruli ulcer.
In 2009 the Saudi authorities set up the Anti-Witchcraft Unit of their Committee for the Promotion of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice police.
The Salem witch trials were a series of hearings before local magistrates followed by county court trials to prosecute people accused of witchcraft in Essex, Suffolk and Middlesex Counties of colonial Massachusetts, between February 1692 and May 1693.
This process of possession is called Kitsunetsuki.
Traditional witchcraft is a term used to refer to a variety of contemporary forms of witchcraft.
According to Russian historian Valerie A. Kivelson, witchcraft accusations were normally thrown at lower-class peasants, townspeople and Cossacks.
There were prayers for every such phase in life; for success in battle; for a change in wind (to overwhelm an adversary at sea, or that an intended voyage be propitious); that his crops may grow; to curse a thief; or wish ill-luck and death to his foes.
The effect of the '''' is a curse and disease, usually indicated by an immediate action to administration of the poison, like fainting, swelling of the tongue, or lockjaw.
Churches are very numerous in Nigeria, and competition for congregations is hard.
Strictly speaking, "necromancy" is the practice of conjuring the spirits of the dead for divination or prophecy&nbsp;– although the term has also been applied to raising the dead for other purposes.
The ''thakathi'' is usually improperly translated into English as "witch", and is a spiteful person who operates in secret to harm others.
Professional prostitutes were considered experts in love and therefore knew how to make love potions and cast love related spells.
Various secular and Christian organizations are combining their efforts to address this problem.
So, during the Oprechnina (1565-1572), Ivan IV succeeded in accusing and charging a good number of boyars with witchcraft whom he did not wish to remain as nobles.
The familiar witch of folklore and popular superstition is a combination of numerous influences.
Such incidents are common in places such as Burkina Faso, Ghana, India, Kenya, Malawi, Nepal and Tanzania.
Sorcerers and sorceresses were often slain by relatives of their supposed victims.
In Wales,  fear of witchcraft mounted around the year 1500.
Due to its hereditary nature, the status of being ''Tsukimono-suji'' is considered contagious.
The concept of a magic-worker influencing another person's body or property against their will was clearly present in many cultures, as traditions in both folk magic and religious magic have the purpose of countering malicious magic or identifying malicious magic users.
An emphasis is placed on ancestor worship.
The ritual format of contemporary Stregheria is roughly similar to that of other Neopagan witchcraft religions such as Wicca.
The best known reference to magic in Islam is the Surah Al-Falaq (meaning dawn or daybreak), which is known as a prayer to Allah to ward off black magic.
However, he did believe that, while "gnosis" referred to knowledge, and "wicca" referred to wisdom, modern witches had fallen away from the true knowledge, and instead had begun worshipping a fertility god, a reflection of the creator god.
There was a growing alarm of women's magic as a weapon aimed against the state and church.
At least five more of the accused died in prison.
The peak years of witch-hunts in southwest Germany were from 1561 to 1670.
Early converts to Christianity looked to Christian clergy to work magic more effectively than the old methods under Roman paganism, and Christianity provided a methodology involving saints and relics, similar to the gods and amulets of the Pagan world.
Complimentary remarks about witchcraft by a native Congolese initiate: "From witchcraft ... may be developed the remedy (''kimbuki'') that will do most to raise up our country."
The majority of those accused were women, though in some regions the majority were men.
The expanded flower of a Gardenia was stuck upright—a very difficult performance—in a cup (i.e., half a large coconut shell) of water.
If we could make use of these kinds of witchcraft, our country would rapidly progress in knowledge of every kind."
Shape-shifting spells involved invocation of the wolf as a spirit animal.
Persecution for witchcraft, mostly involved the practice of simple earth magic, founded on herbology, by solitary practitioners with a Christian influence.
But if the flower still remained upright, he will live.
Because of this, there exist six witch camps in the country where women suspected of being witches can flee for safety.
In contemporary times luciferian witches exist within traditional witchcraft.
Very early on witchcraft legally fell under the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical body, the church, in Kievan Rus' and Muscovite Russia.
Occult power was supposedly a womanly trait because women were weaker and more susceptible to the devil.
Thus, even though torture methods in Muscovy were on a similar level of harshness as Western European methods used, a more civil method was present.
The Wicca that Gardner initially taught was a witchcraft religion having a lot in common with Margaret Murray's hypothetically posited cult of the 1920s.
Witches disrupted the societal institutions, and more specifically, marriage.
If a child at school says that his/her pastor called the child a witch that should become a child safeguarding issue.
Among the Russian words for ''witch'', ведьма (ved'ma) literally means "one who knows", from Old Slavic вѣдъ "to know").
Judaism does make it clear that Jews shall not try to learn about the ways of witches (Deuteronomy/Devarim 18: 9–10) and that witches are to be put to death.
The point was that a widespread belief in the conspiracy of witches and a witches' Sabbath with the devil deprived women of political influence.
Because single people with no settled home could not be taxed, males typically had more power than women in their dissent.
They are believed to take the forms of animals in order to travel in secret and do harm to the innocent.
Most practitioners worship three main deities; the Star Goddess, and two divine twins, one of whom is the blue God.
Spells also served for midwifery, shape-shifting, keeping lovers faithful, and bridal customs.
It was reported on May 21, 2008 that in Kenya, a mob had burnt to death at least 11 people accused of witchcraft.
Her sweat would be wiped from her body using raw fish, and the fish would be cooked and fed to the groom.
Traditional Navajos usually hesitate to discuss things like witches and witchcraft with non-Navajos.
The ''Malleus Maleficarum,'' (Latin for "Hammer of The Witches") was a witch-hunting manual written in 1486 by two German monks, Heinrich Kramer and Jacob Sprenger.
Beliefs related to witchcraft and magic in these cultures were at times influenced by the prevailing Western concepts.
The records of the Courts of Great Sessions for Wales, 1536-1736 show that Welsh custom was more important than English law.
Belief in the supernatural is strong in all parts of India, and lynchings for witchcraft are reported in the press from time to time.
In these cases, the "magic" was seen more as divine miracles (i.e., coming from God rather than "unclean" forces) than as witchcraft.
The problem is particularly serious among immigrant or former immigrant communities of African origin but other communities, such as those of Asian origin are also involved.
"Warlock" is sometimes mistakenly used for male witch.
The knowledge of which verses of the Qur'an to use in what way is what is considered "magic knowledge."
For instance, in Saudi Arabia practicing 'witchcraft and sorcery' is a crime punishable by death and the country has executed people for this crime in 2011, 2012 and 2014.
The majority of women accused were also considered "outsiders" because they were poor, had different religious practices, spoke a different language, or simply from a different city/town/region.
The Western mainstream Christian view is far from the only societal perspective about witchcraft.
Repeated themes include participation in processions of the dead or large feasts, often presided over by a horned male deity or a female divinity who teaches magic and gives prophecies; and participation in battles against evil spirits, "vampires", or "witches" to win fertility and prosperity for the community.
28), and it is among the witchcraft practices condemned by Ælfric of Eynsham:
While some church leaders and Christian activists have spoken out strongly against these abuses, many Nigerian churches are involved in the abuse, although church administrations deny knowledge of it.
Folk magicians throughout Europe were often viewed ambivalently by communities, and were considered as capable of harming as of healing, which could lead to their being accused as "witches" in the negative sense.
The two major trends are theistic Satanism and atheistic Satanism; the former venerates Satan as a supernatural patriarchal deity, while the latter views Satan as merely a symbolic embodiment of certain human traits.
The Church and European society were not always so zealous in hunting witches or blaming them for misfortunes.
Children may be beaten or have chilli rubbed into their eyes during exorcisms.
The total number of witch trials in Europe known for certain to have ended in executions is around 12,000.
Witchcraft was also an important part of the social and cultural history of late-Colonial Mexico.
In Tanzania, albinos are often murdered for their body parts on the advice of witch doctors in order to produce powerful amulets that are believed to protect against witchcraft and make the owner prosper in life.
The prayers offered by the ''ta'unga'' (priests) to the gods worshiped on national or tribal ''marae'' (temples) were termed ''karakia''; those on minor occasions to the lesser gods were named ''pure''.
Likewise, alleged witchcraft was not isolated to New England.
Many neopagan witches strongly identify with this concept, and profess ethical codes that prevent them from performing magic on a person without their request.
In the course of "exorcisms", accused children may be starved, beaten, mutilated, set on fire, forced to consume acid or cement, or buried alive.
A singular enchantment was employed to kill off a husband of a pretty woman desired by someone else.
Spoilers could be made by gathering bone from a cemetery, a knot of the target's hair, burned wooden splinters and several herb Paris berries (which are very poisonous).
The witchcraft practiced consisted mostly of earth magic and herbology; it was not so significant which herbs were used in practices, but how these herbs were gathered.
Spells traditionally were cast by many methods, such as by the inscription of runes or sigils on an object to give it magical powers; by the immolation or binding of a wax or clay image (poppet) of a person to affect him or her magically; by the recitation of incantations; by the performance of physical rituals; by the employment of magical herbs as amulets or potions; by gazing at mirrors, swords or other specula (scrying) for purposes of divination; and by many other means.
In Malawi it is also common practice to accuse children of witchcraft and many children have been abandoned, abused and even killed as a result.
They argued that English witchcraft, like African witchcraft, was endemic rather than epidemic.
This denial was accepted into Canon law until it was reversed in later centuries as the witch-hunt gained force.
The Crucible by Arthur Miller is a dramatized and partially fictionalized story of the Salem witch trials that took place in the Massachusetts Bay Colony during 1692-93.
Although typically united by a shared aesthetic rooted in European folklore, the Traditional Craft contains within its ranks a rich and varied array of occult groups, from those who follow a contemporary Pagan path that is suspiciously similar to Wicca to those who adhere to Luciferianism".
The precise meaning of the Hebrew ''kashaph'', usually translated as "witch" or "sorceress", is uncertain.
This involved the persecution of both males and females who were believed to be practicing paganism, herbology, the black art, or a form of sorcery within and/or outside their community.
The key century was the fifteenth, which saw a dramatic rise in awareness and terror of witchcraft, culminating in the publication of the ''Malleus Maleficarum'' but prepared by such fanatical popular preachers as Bernardino of Siena.
The ratio of male to female accusations was 75% to 25%.
"Neighbourhood witches" are the product of neighbourhood tensions, and are found only in self-sufficient serf village communities where the inhabitants largely rely on each other.
European witchcraft is seen by historians and anthropologists as an ideology for explaining misfortune; however, this ideology has manifested in diverse ways, as described below.
Throughout this time, it was increasingly believed that Christianity was engaged in an apocalyptic battle against the Devil and his secret army of witches, who had entered into a diabolical pact.
Neither are regarded as magic, but as signs of Allah at the hands of those close to Him that occur by His will and His alone.
Older women were the favorite targets because they were marginal, dependent members of the community and therefore more likely to arouse feelings of both hostility and guilt, and less likely to have defenders of importance inside the community.
A Saudi man has been beheaded on charges of sorcery and witchcraft in June 2012.
Russian pagan practices were often akin to paganism in other parts of the world.
The belief in jinn is part of the Muslim faith.
Solomon disbelieved not; but the devils disbelieved, teaching mankind sorcery and that which was revealed to the two angels in Babel, Harut and Marut&nbsp;... And surely they do know that he who trafficketh therein will have no (happy) portion in the Hereafter; and surely evil is the price for which they sell their souls, if they but knew.
From the mid-20th century, witchcraft – sometimes called contemporary witchcraft to clearly distinguish it from older beliefs – became the name of a branch of modern paganism.
The sorcerer would in that case try his skill another day, with perhaps better success.
For example, they were allowed in the British Royal Navy in 2004,  and an appeal was considered in 2005 for religious status as a right of prisoners by the Supreme Court of the United States.
A prayer was then offered for the husbands speedy death, the sorcerer earnestly watching the flower.
Placing these items in sachet in the victim's pillow completes a spoiler.
In total, tens or hundreds of thousands of people were executed, and others were imprisoned, tortured, banished, and had lands and possessions confiscated.
They operated as initiatory secret societies.
This type of abuse is frequently hidden and can include torture.
Up until 1630, the majority of women accused of witchcraft were prostitutes.
Of these three categories the ''thakatha'' is almost exclusively female, the ''sangoma'' is usually female, and the ''inyanga'' is almost exclusively male.
Few men of middle age were without a number of these prayers or charms.
While it is easy for modern people to dismiss such reports, Uchenna Okeja argues that a belief system in which such magical practices are deemed possible offer many benefits to Africans who hold them.
Powers typically attributed to European witches include turning food poisonous or inedible, flying on broomsticks or pitchforks, casting spells, cursing people, making livestock ill and crops fail, and creating fear and local chaos.
Spanish Inquisitors viewed witchcraft as a problem that could be cured simply through confession.
This idea is commonplace in pre-Christian religions.
Despite being generally known as the "Salem" witch trials, the preliminary hearings in 1692 were conducted in a variety of towns across the province: Salem Village, Ipswich, Andover, as well as Salem Town, Massachusetts.
The country had a large number of unmarried people due to men marrying later in their lives during this time.
There was a political dimension as well, as accusations of witchcraft were levied against the enemies of Henry VII, who was exerting more and more control over Wales.
According to Beatrice Grimshaw, a journalist who visited the Cook Islands in 1907, the uncrowned Queen Makea was believed to have possessed the mystic power called ''mana'',  giving the possessor the power to slay at will.
In many villages, the status of local families as ''tsukimono-suji'' is often common, everyday knowledge.
His theory still holds some currency, but is not widely accepted, and in  ''kashaph'' is listed alongside other magic practitioners who could interpret dreams: magicians, astrologers, and Chaldeans.
Tsar Ivan IV (reigned 1547-1584) took this matter to the ecclesiastical court and was immediately advised that individuals practicing these forms of witchcraft should be excommunicated and given the death penalty.
A spoiler was rooted in envy, jealousy and malice.
From the 16th-18th centuries, the Catholic Church enforced moral discipline throughout Italy.
At America's first witch trial, Hugh was found innocent, while Mary was acquitted of witchcraft but sentenced to be hanged for the death of her child.
The ''yee naaldlooshii'' is the type of witch known in English as a "skin-walker".
Some pastors attempt to establish a reputation for spiritual power by "detecting" child witches, usually following a death or loss of a job within a family, or an accusation of financial fraud against the pastor.
Corpse powder or corpse poison (, literally "witchery" or "harming") is a substance made from powdered corpses.
The ''sangoma'' is a diviner, somewhere on a par with a fortune teller, and is employed in detecting illness, predicting a person's future (or advising them on which path to take), or identifying the guilty party in a crime.
Botanicals should be gathered, "During the seventeenth minute of the fourteenth hour, under a dark moon, in the thirteenth field, wearing a red dress, pick the twelfth flower on the right."
"There were a number of interchangeable terms for these practitioners, 'white', 'good', or 'unbinding' witches, blessers, wizards, sorcerers, however 'cunning-man' and 'wise-man' were the most frequent."
Apart from extrajudicial violence, there is also state-sanctioned violence in some jurisdictions.
(Christianity can be characterized as having the diametrically opposite views to these.)
The ''inyanga'' is often translated as "witch doctor" (though many Southern Africans resent this implication, as it perpetuates the mistaken belief that a "witch doctor" is in some sense a ''practitioner'' of malicious magic).
Stemming from this belief, Ivan IV became majorly concerned with the threat of witchcraft harming his family, and feared he was in danger.
Feng shui, an influence from Filipino Chinese culture, is also not classified as witchcraft, and it is seen as a separate realm of belief altogether.
The book became the handbook for secular courts throughout Renaissance Europe, but was not used by the Inquisition, which even cautioned against relying on the work, and was later officially condemned by the Catholic Church in 1490.
So placing cash, such as kwacha around a room or bed mat will protect the resident from their malevolent spells.
Imam Muslim narrated the Prophet said: "Allah created the angels from light, created the jinn from the pure flame of fire, and Adam from that which was described to you (i.e., the clay.)".
While perhaps the most common variety seen in horror fiction by non-Navajo people, the '''' is one of several varieties of Navajo witch, specifically a type of  ''''.
In the Navajo language, '''' translates to "with it, he goes on all fours".
They could also gather the power of animals into their hands ... whenever they needed.
