Solomon considers his three closest friends to have been Gottfried von Jacquin, Count August Hatzfeld, and Sigmund Barisani; others included his older colleague Joseph Haydn, singers Franz Xaver Gerl and Benedikt Schack, and the horn player Joseph Leutgeb.
When Nannerl was seven, she began keyboard lessons with her father while her three-year-old brother looked on.
During his final years in Vienna, he composed many of his best-known symphonies, concertos, and operas, and portions of the Requiem, which was largely unfinished at the time of his death.
The concerts were very popular, and the concertos he premiered at them are still firm fixtures in the repertoire.
In London as a child, he met J.&nbsp;C. Bach and heard his music.
He also prospered as a composer, and in 1782 completed the opera ''Die Entführung aus dem Serail'' ("The Abduction from the Seraglio"), which premiered on 16 July 1782 and achieved a huge success.
He loved elegant clothing.
Leopold became the orchestra's deputy Kapellmeister in 1763.
The expression "common grave" refers to neither a communal grave nor a pauper's grave, but to an individual grave for a member of the common people (i.e., not the aristocracy).
While Mozart was in Paris, his father was pursuing opportunities of employment for him in Salzburg.
Mozart was baptized the day after his birth at St. Rupert's Cathedral.
Toward the end of the decade, Mozart's circumstances worsened.
For unambiguous identification of works by Mozart, a ''Köchel catalogue number'' is used.
1786 saw the successful premiere of ''The Marriage of Figaro'' in Vienna.
He often made sketches and drafts; unlike Beethoven's these are mostly not preserved, as his wife sought to destroy them after his death.
On 14 December 1784, Mozart became a Freemason, admitted to the lodge Zur Wohltätigkeit ("Beneficence").
The family again went to Vienna in late 1767 and remained there until December 1768.
He continued his professional functions for some time, and conducted the premiere of ''The Magic Flute'' on 30 September.
It was a part-time appointment, paying just 800 florins per year, and required Mozart only to compose dances for the annual balls in the Redoutensaal (see ''Mozart and dance'').
The courtship did not go entirely smoothly; surviving correspondence indicates that Mozart and Constanze briefly separated in April 1782.
While visiting Vienna in 1781, he was dismissed from his Salzburg position.
The annual salary was 450 florins, but he was reluctant to accept.
During this trip, Mozart met a number of musicians and acquainted himself with the works of other composers.
Major works of the period include the last three symphonies (Nos.&nbsp;39, 40, and 41, all from 1788), and the last of the three Da Ponte operas, ''Così fan tutte'', premiered in 1790.
These trips were often difficult and travel conditions were primitive.
He had a startling fondness for scatological humor, which is preserved in his surviving letters, notably those written to his cousin Maria Anna Thekla Mozart around 1777–1778, and in his correspondence with his sister and parents.
Emperor Joseph II appointed him as his "chamber composer", a post that had fallen vacant the previous month on the death of Gluck.
Mozart also wrote scatological music, a series of canons that he sang with his friends.
He often spent much time at the clavier, picking out thirds, which he was ever striking, and his pleasure showed that it sounded good....
It is probable that his father transcribed most of it for him.
Mozart decided to settle in Vienna as a freelance performer and composer.
In all of Mozart's supreme expressions of suffering and terror, there is something shockingly voluptuous.
Ever since the surge in his reputation after his death, studying his scores has been a standard part of classical musicians' training.
This is a unique number assigned, in regular chronological order, to every one of his known works.
He fell into debt and took to pawning valuables.
Others include Fernando Sor's Introduction and Variations on a Theme by Mozart (1821), Mikhail Glinka's Variations on a Theme from Mozart's Opera "Die Zauberflöte" (1822), Frédéric Chopin's Variations on "Là ci darem la mano" from ''Don Giovanni'' (1827), and Max Reger's Variations and Fugue on a Theme by Mozart (1914), based on the variation theme in the piano sonata K.&nbsp;331;
Here his advances in opera and instrumental composing interacted: his increasingly sophisticated use of the orchestra in the symphonies and concertos influenced his operatic orchestration, and his developing subtlety in using the orchestra to psychological effect in his operas was in turn reflected in his later non-operatic compositions.
Ludwig van Beethoven, Mozart's junior by fifteen years, was deeply influenced by his work, with which he was acquainted as a teenager.
A long concert tour followed spanning three and a half years, taking the family to the courts of Munich, Mannheim, Paris, London, The Hague, again to Paris, and back home via Zurich, Donaueschingen, and Munich.
Beethoven wrote four such sets (Op.&nbsp;66, WoO&nbsp;28, WoO&nbsp;40, WoO&nbsp;46).
The influence of the ''Sturm und Drang'' ("Storm and Stress") period in music, with its brief foreshadowing of the Romantic era, is evident in the music of both composers at that time.
He performed often as a pianist, notably in a competition before the Emperor with Muzio Clementi on 24 December 1781, and he soon "had established himself as the finest keyboard player in Vienna".
In Munich, he again encountered Aloysia, now a very successful singer, but she was no longer interested in him.
Around the end of 1785, Mozart moved away from keyboard writing and began his famous operatic collaboration with the librettist Lorenzo Da Ponte.
Already competent on keyboard and violin, he composed from the age of five and performed before European royalty.
The last three—K.&nbsp;216, K.&nbsp;218, K.&nbsp;219—are now staples of the repertoire.
Mozart's most famous pupil, whom the Mozarts took into their Vienna home for two years as a child, was probably Johann Nepomuk Hummel, a transitional figure between Classical and Romantic eras.
Around 1786 he had ceased to appear frequently in public concerts, and his income shrank.
In his later operas he employed subtle changes in instrumentation, orchestral texture, and tone color, for emotional depth and to mark dramatic shifts.
Though not completed, it was premiered in Salzburg, with Constanze singing a solo part.
No reliable records survive to indicate whether the two composers ever met.
Near the height of his quarrels with Colloredo, Mozart moved in with the Weber family, who had moved to Vienna from Mannheim.
In 1776 he turned his efforts to piano concertos, culminating in the E-flat concerto K.&nbsp;271 of early 1777, considered by critics to be a breakthrough work.
Mozart passionately defended his intention to pursue an independent career in Vienna.
Mozart's six quartets dedicated to Haydn (K.&nbsp;387, K.&nbsp;421, K.&nbsp;428, K.&nbsp;458, K.&nbsp;464, and K.&nbsp;465) date from the period 1782 to 1785, and are judged to be a response to Haydn's Opus 33 set from 1781.
Composers have paid homage to Mozart by writing sets of variations on his themes.
This modest income became important to Mozart when hard times arrived.
As with earlier journeys, Leopold wanted to display his son's abilities as a performer and a rapidly maturing composer.
With the support of the local nobility, Mozart was offered a post as court organist and concertmaster.
Mozart met Joseph Haydn in Vienna around 1784, and the two composers became friends.
Common graves were subject to excavation after ten years; the graves of aristocrats were not.
Mozart always had a gift for absorbing and adapting valuable features of others' music.
The family had to wait for invitations and reimbursement from the nobility and they endured long, near-fatal illnesses far from home: first Leopold (London, summer 1764), then both children (The Hague, autumn 1765).
When Haydn visited Vienna, they sometimes played together in an impromptu string quartet.
He chose to stay in the capital, where he achieved fame but little financial security.
*Anna Maria (died soon after birth, 16 November 1789)
*Theresia Constanzia Adelheid Friedericke Maria Anna (27 December 1787&nbsp;– 29 June 1788)
His travels helped in the forging of a unique compositional language.
Mozart usually worked long and hard, finishing compositions at a tremendous pace as deadlines approached.
He is thought to have performed Mozart's operas while playing in the court orchestra at Bonn, and traveled to Vienna in 1787 hoping to study with the older composer.
Around this time, Mozart made some long journeys hoping to improve his fortunes: to Leipzig, Dresden, and Berlin in the spring of 1789, and to Frankfurt, Mannheim, and other German cities in 1790.
Especially during his last decade, Mozart exploited chromatic harmony to a degree rare at the time, with remarkable assurance and to great artistic effect.
The work was soon being performed "throughout German-speaking Europe", and fully established Mozart's reputation as a composer.
He returned with his father twice to Milan (August–December 1771; October 1772&nbsp;– March 1773) for the composition and premieres of ''Ascanio in Alba'' (1771) and ''Lucio Silla'' (1772).
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart was born on 27January 1756 to Leopold Mozart (1719–1787) and Anna Maria, née Pertl (1720–1778), at 9&nbsp;Getreidegasse in Salzburg.
Mozart faced a very difficult task in getting his father's permission for the marriage.
After one year in Salzburg, Leopold and Mozart set off for Italy, leaving Mozart's mother and sister at home.
He focused instead on his career as a piano soloist and writer of concertos.
Fresh from the adulation he had earned in Munich, Mozart was offended when Colloredo treated him as a mere servant and particularly when the archbishop forbade him to perform before the Emperor at Countess Thun's for a fee equal to half of his yearly Salzburg salary.
Court records show that Joseph's aim was to keep the esteemed composer from leaving Vienna in pursuit of better prospects.
Four years later, he married Anna Maria in Salzburg.
These began with an exhibition in 1762 at the court of Prince-elector Maximilian III of Bavaria in Munich, and at the Imperial Court in Vienna and Prague.
His early biographer Niemetschek wrote, "there was nothing special about his physique.
He also fell in love with Aloysia Weber, one of four daughters of a musical family.
There were prospects of employment in Mannheim, but they came to nothing, and Mozart left for Paris on 14 March 1778 to continue his search.
The circumstances of his early death have been much mythologized.
Mozart was interred in a common grave, in accordance with contemporary Viennese custom, at the St. Marx Cemetery outside the city on 7 December.
Mozart was a versatile composer, and wrote in every major genre, including symphony, opera, the solo concerto, chamber music including string quartet and string quintet, and the piano sonata.
Neither visit was successful, though the Munich journey resulted in a popular success with the premiere of Mozart's opera ''La finta giardiniera''.
He enjoyed billiards and dancing, and kept pets: a canary, a starling, a dog, and a horse for recreational riding.
His first ink-spattered composition and his precocious efforts with the violin were of his own initiative and came as a surprise to his father.
Although it has been suggested that Mozart's aim was to reduce his rental expenses, research shows that by moving to the suburb, Mozart had not in fact reduced his expenses (as claimed in his letter to Puchberg), but merely increased the housing space at his disposal.
Mozart met Josef Mysliveček and Giovanni Battista Martini in Bologna and was accepted as a member of the famous Accademia Filarmonica.
Mozart died in his home on  at 1:00 am.
In 1787 the young Ludwig van Beethoven spent several weeks in Vienna, hoping to study with Mozart.
For further details see Mozart and Beethoven.
As Mozart matured, he progressively incorporated more features adapted from the Baroque.
Along with music, he taught his children languages and academic subjects.
At 17, Mozart was engaged as a musician at the Salzburg court, but grew restless and traveled in search of a better position.
If, as later reports say, no mourners attended, that too is consistent with Viennese burial customs at the time; later Jahn (1856) wrote that Salieri, Süssmayr, van Swieten and two other musicians were present.
The couple had six children, of whom only two survived infancy:
Mozart bought a fine fortepiano from Anton Walter for about 900 florins, and a billiard table for about 300.
Mozart's modest funeral did not reflect his standing with the public as a composer: memorial services and concerts in Vienna and Prague were well-attended.
Mozart wrote his first symphony when he was eight years old.
Mozart's study of these scores inspired compositions in Baroque style, and later influenced his personal musical language, for example in fugal passages in ''Die Zauberflöte'' ("The Magic Flute") and the finale of Symphony No.&nbsp;41.
Mozart lived at the center of the Viennese musical world, and knew a great number and variety of people: fellow musicians, theatrical performers, fellow Salzburgers, and aristocrats, including some acquaintance with the Emperor Joseph II.
*Franz Xaver Wolfgang Mozart (26 July 1791&nbsp;– 29 July 1844)
Mozart's physical appearance was described by tenor Michael Kelly, in his ''Reminiscences'': "a remarkably small man, very thin and pale, with a profusion of fine, fair hair of which he was rather vain".
He wrote a great deal of religious music, including large-scale masses, as well as dances, divertimenti, serenades, and other forms of light entertainment.
By that time, relations between Grimm and Mozart had cooled, and Mozart moved out.
; 27 January 1756&nbsp;– 5 December 1791), baptised as '''Johannes Chrysostomus Wolfgangus Theophilus Mozart''', was a prolific and influential composer of the Classical era.
At the time he began composing, European music was dominated by the ''style galant'', a reaction against the highly evolved intricacy of the Baroque.
In 1783, Mozart and his wife visited his family in Salzburg.
This travel lasted from December 1769 to March 1771.
They moved to an expensive apartment, with a yearly rent of 460 florins.
These early pieces, K. 1–5, were recorded in the ''Nannerl Notenbuch''.
In London and Italy, the galant style was in the ascendent: simple, light music with a mania for cadencing; an emphasis on tonic, dominant, and subdominant to the exclusion of other harmonies; symmetrical phrases; and clearly articulated partitions in the overall form of movements.
The Mozarts sent their son Karl Thomas to an expensive boarding school, and kept servants.
Indeed, in the period immediately after his death, his reputation rose substantially: Solomon describes an "unprecedented wave of enthusiasm" for his work; biographies were written (first by Schlichtegroll, Niemetschek, and Nissen); and publishers vied to produce complete editions of his works.
The first edition of the catalogue was completed in 1862 by Ludwig von Köchel.
His father and sister were cordially polite to Constanze, but the visit prompted the composition of one of Mozart's great liturgical pieces, the Mass in C minor.
The central traits of the Classical style are all present in Mozart's music.
Although the evidence is inconclusive, it appears that wealthy patrons in Hungary and Amsterdam pledged annuities to Mozart in return for the occasional composition.
Among the better known works which Mozart wrote on the Paris journey are the A minor piano sonata, K.&nbsp;310/300d and the "Paris" Symphony (No.&nbsp;31), which were performed in Paris on 12 and 18 June 1778.
Some of his quartets from 1773 have fugal finales, probably influenced by Haydn, who had included three such finales in his recently published Opus&nbsp;20 set.
The following month, permission was granted but in a grossly insulting way: the composer was dismissed literally "with a kick in the arse", administered by the archbishop's steward, Count Arco.
He generally called himself "Wolfgang Amadè Mozart" as an adult, but his name had many variants.
In Rome, he heard Gregorio Allegri's ''Miserere'' twice in performance in the Sistine Chapel and wrote it out from memory, thus producing the first unauthorized copy of this closely guarded property of the Vatican.
These developments were not witnessed by Mozart's father, who had died on 28 May 1787.
Charles Rosen makes the point forcefully:
In December 1787, Mozart finally obtained a steady post under aristocratic patronage.
Mozart finally returned to Salzburg on 15 January 1779 and took up his new appointment, but his discontentment with Salzburg remained undiminished.
*Karl Thomas Mozart (21 September 1784&nbsp;– 31 October 1858)
Mozart began to borrow money, most often from his friend and fellow Mason Michael Puchberg; "a pitiful sequence of letters pleading for loans" survives.
The following March, Mozart was summoned to Vienna, where his employer, Archbishop Colloredo, was attending the celebrations for the accession of Joseph II to the Austrian throne.
The two are among Mozart's most important works and are mainstays of the operatic repertoire today, though at their premieres their musical complexity caused difficulty for both listeners and performers.
Mozart's music, like Haydn's, stands as an archetype of the Classical style.
Solomon notes that, while Leopold was a devoted teacher to his children, there is evidence that Mozart was keen to progress beyond what he was taught.
Mozart's interest shifted to the third Weber daughter, Constanze.
Mozart's new career in Vienna began well.
*Johann Thomas Leopold (18 October&nbsp;– 15 November 1786)
He was survived by his wife Constanze and two sons.
Mozart's financial situation, a source of anxiety in 1790, finally began to improve.
The baptismal record gives his name in Latinized form as ''Joannes Chrysostomus Wolfgangus Theophilus Mozart''.
Leopold eventually gave up composing when his son's musical talents became evident.
Between April and December 1775, Mozart developed an enthusiasm for violin concertos, producing a series of five (the only ones he ever wrote), which steadily increased in their musical sophistication.
'''Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart''' (, English see fn.
The cause of Mozart's death cannot be known with certainty.
Clarity, balance, and transparency are the hallmarks of his work, but simplistic notions of its delicacy mask the exceptional power of his finest masterpieces, such as the Piano Concerto No.
Of his voice his wife later wrote that it "was a tenor, rather soft in speaking and delicate in singing, but when anything excited him, or it became necessary to exert it, it was both powerful and energetic".
In Italy he encountered the Italian overture and opera buffa, both of which deeply affected the evolution of his own practice.
Ludwig van Beethoven composed his own early works in the shadow of Mozart, and Joseph Haydn wrote that "posterity will not see such a talent again in 100 years".
Maynard Solomon and others have suggested that Mozart was suffering from depression, and it seems that his output slowed.
In the course of 1782 and 1783, Mozart became intimately acquainted with the work of Johann Sebastian Bach and George Frideric Handel as a result of the influence of Gottfried van Swieten, who owned many manuscripts of the Baroque masters.
Researchers have posited at least 118 causes of death, including acute rheumatic fever, streptococcal infection, trichinosis, influenza, mercury poisoning, and a rare kidney ailment.
Mozart no longer borrowed large sums from Puchberg, and made a start on paying off his debts.
Saving was therefore impossible, and the short period of financial success did nothing to soften the hardship the Mozarts were later to experience.
In a paradoxical way, Schumann's superficial characterization of the G minor Symphony can help us to see Mozart's daemon more steadily.
Since space in the theaters was scarce, he booked unconventional venues: a large room in the Trattnerhof (an apartment building), and the ballroom of the Mehlgrube (a restaurant).
This was the capital of the Archbishopric of Salzburg, an ecclesiastic principality in what is now Austria, then part of the Holy Roman Empire.
The official record has it as "hitziges Frieselfieber" ("severe miliary fever", referring to a rash that looks like millet seeds), more a description of the symptoms than a diagnosis.
Some of Mozart's early symphonies are Italian overtures, with three movements running into each other; many are homotonal (all three movements having the same key signature, with the slow middle movement being in the relative minor).
Hoping fervently that he would obediently follow Colloredo back to Salzburg, Mozart's father exchanged intense letters with his son, urging him to be reconciled with their employer.
Some of Beethoven's works have direct models in comparable works by Mozart, and he wrote cadenzas (WoO&nbsp;58) to Mozart's D minor piano concerto K.&nbsp;466.
The trips produced only isolated success and did not relieve the family's financial distress.
Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky wrote his Orchestral Suite No.&nbsp;4 in G, ''Mozartiana'' (1887), as a tribute to Mozart.
Despite the great success of ''Die Entführung aus dem Serail'', Mozart did little operatic writing for the next four years, producing only two unfinished works and the one-act ''Der Schauspieldirektor''.
This was a difficult time for musicians in Vienna because of the Austro-Turkish War:  both the general level of prosperity and the ability of the aristocracy to support music had declined.
Mozart became acquainted with members of the famous orchestra in Mannheim, the best in Europe at the time.
The nadir of the visit occurred when Mozart's mother was taken ill and died on 3 July 1778.
Mozart and his father visited Vienna from 14 July to 26 September 1773, and Munich from 6 December 1774 to March 1775.
The composer had a great number of friends and admirers in Salzburg and had the opportunity to work in many genres, including symphonies, sonatas, string quartets, masses, serenades, and a few minor operas.
A particularly important influence was Johann Christian Bach, whom Mozart visited in London in 1764 and 1765.
Its reception in Prague later in the year was even warmer, and this led to a second collaboration with Da Ponte: the opera ''Don Giovanni'', which premiered in October 1787 to acclaim in Prague, but less success in Vienna in 1788.
Solomon writes that during this period Mozart created "a harmonious connection between an eager composer-performer and a delighted audience, which was given the opportunity of witnessing the transformation and perfection of a major musical genre".
His health deteriorated on 20&nbsp;November, at which point he became bedridden, suffering from swelling, pain, and vomiting.
After leaving Paris in September 1778 for Strasbourg, he lingered in Mannheim and Munich, still hoping to obtain an appointment outside Salzburg.
There had been delays in calling a doctor—probably, according to Halliwell, because of a lack of funds.
Leopold Mozart, a native of Augsburg, Germany, was a minor composer and an experienced teacher.
The father, Fridolin, had died, and the Webers were now taking in lodgers to make ends meet.
With substantial returns from his concerts and elsewhere, Mozart and his wife adopted a rather plush lifestyle.
From 1782 to 1785 Mozart mounted concerts with himself as soloist, presenting three or four new piano concertos in each season.
During Mozart's youth, his family made several European journeys in which he and Nannerl performed as child prodigies.
In January 1781, Mozart's opera ''Idomeneo'' premiered with "considerable success" in Munich.
This led to further opera commissions.
Mozart would sometimes switch his focus between operas and instrumental music.
The couple were finally married on 4 August 1782 in St. Stephen's Cathedral, the day before his father's consent arrived in the mail.
Mozart's Symphony No.&nbsp;25 in G minor K.&nbsp;183 is another excellent example.
He was the youngest of seven children, five of whom died in infancy.
He is among the most enduringly popular of classical composers, and his influence is profound on subsequent Western art music.
A work is referenced by the abbreviation "K." or "KV" followed by this number.
The tale of a storm and snow is false; the day was calm and mild.
One of his letters from Paris hints at a possible post as an organist at Versailles, but Mozart was not interested in such an appointment.
Progressively, and in large part at the hands of Mozart himself, the contrapuntal complexities of the late Baroque emerged once more, moderated and disciplined by new forms, and adapted to a new aesthetic and social milieu.
In his early years, Mozart's father was his only teacher.
The debate ended when Mozart was dismissed by the archbishop, freeing himself both of his employer and his father's demands to return.
Leutgeb and Mozart carried on a curious kind of friendly mockery, often with Leutgeb as the butt of Mozart's practical jokes.
Solomon characterizes Mozart's resignation as a "revolutionary step", and it greatly altered the course of his life.
Born in Salzburg, Mozart showed prodigious ability from his earliest childhood.
The ''New Grove'' describes his funeral:
