After his visit home, and while en route back to France, Wilson suffered an illness; the ensuing months brought a decline in health and in power and prestige.
He was interred in a sarcophagus in Washington National Cathedral and is the only president interred in the nation's capital.
After graduation, she pursued portrait art and received a medal for one of her works from the Paris International Exposition.
It proved possible to build a majority for the treaty in the Senate, but the two-thirds coalition needed to ratify was insurmountable.
When the time came, Wilson spent six months in Paris for the Peace Conference, thereby becoming the first U.S. president to travel to Europe while in office.
At Wesleyan, he coached the football team and founded the debate team, which bears his name.
Wilson had earlier downplayed Germany's guilt in starting the war by calling for "peace without victory", but he had taken an increasingly hard stand at Paris and rejected advice to soften the treaty's treatment of Germany.
This lasted until March 1915, when he moderated, drew back from the bill and, without its passage, congratulated the Congress for its work in the session just ended—his initial journey through mourning was evident.
Their visits together became a regular occurrence on his return.
The president demanded the Germans reject their submarine tactics.
He tried to raise admission standards and to replace the "gentleman's C" with serious study.
His decision-making style was to use solitude in conjunction with prevailing opinions in making decisions.
When Ellen was pregnant with their first child in 1886, the couple decided that Ellen should go to her Aunt Louisa Brown's residence in Gainesville, Georgia, to have their first child; she arrived just one day before the baby, Margaret, was born in April 1886.
The Hughes report released on October 31 found no major corruption violations or theft in Wilson's Mobilization program, although the report found incompetence in the aircraft program.
There is such a thing as a nation being so right that it does not need to convince others by force that it is right".
From 1914 until early 1917, Wilson's primary objective was to keep America out of the war in Europe, and his policy was, "the true spirit of neutrality, which is the spirit of impartiality and fairness and friendliness to all concerned."
To further counter disloyalty to the war effort at home, Wilson pushed through Congress the Espionage Act of 1917 and the Sedition Act of 1918 to suppress anti-British, pro-German, or anti-war statements.
The book reflected the greater power of the legislature, relative to the executive, during the post-bellum period.
Since then, four more stamps were issued in Wilson's honor, the last being issued in 1998.
Wilson took the view, based on some reasonable evidence, that both incidents were accidental, and that a settlement of claims could be postponed to the end of the war.
While Wilson was in Atlanta, his wife Ellen, alert that key Democrat William Jennings Bryan was visiting Princeton, and recalling Wilson's opposition to him in 1896, invited him for dinner upon Wilson's return.
She happily agreed to sacrifice further independent artistic pursuits in order to keep her marriage commitment, and in 1885 she and Wilson married.
Joseph Wilson owned slaves, defended slavery, and also set up a Sunday school for his slaves.
The convention deadlocked for over forty ballots—no candidate could reach the two-thirds vote required.
Unknown to Washington, Germany's Zimmermann Telegram had already invited Mexico to join in war against the United States.
In early 1917, as tensions with Germany escalated toward war.
This serendipitous comment inspired the title of Wilson's policy of "New Freedom", emphasizing lower tariffs and limited federal government, albeit with increased anti-trust law enforcement and creation of a new banking regulator, the Federal Reserve System.
In the hotly contested presidential election of 1876, Wilson declared his support for the Democratic Party and its nominee, Samuel J. Tilden.
He was also a faculty member of the short-lived coordinate college, Evelyn College for Women.
After consulting with Brandeis, Wilson declared the banking system must be "public not private, must be vested in the government itself so that the banks must be the instruments, not the masters, of business."
The bosses had chosen their man, but his nomination was not a given—many, including organized labor, felt Wilson was an inexperienced newcomer.
In March 1917 several American ships were sunk by Germany and Teddy Roosevelt privately reacted, "if he does not go to war I shall skin him alive".
His oratory style was, "right out of my mind as it is working at the time".
Wilson, who took office shortly after Madero's assassination in 1913, rejected the legitimacy of Huerta's "government of butchers" and demanded Mexico hold democratic elections.
In an effort at reform and to shake up his Mobilization program, Wilson removed the chief of the Army Signal Corps and the chairman of the Aircraft Production Board on April 18, 1918.
Indeed, on the tenth ballot New York's delegation went unanimously to Clark, and the battle lines were clearly drawn between the bosses and the rank and file delegates.
Wilson, the only Democrat besides Grover Cleveland to be elected president since 1856 and the first Southerner since 1848, recognized his Party's need for high-level federal patronage.
As the Party platform was drafted, Senator Owen of Oklahoma urged Wilson to take ideas from the Progressive Party platform of 1912 "as a means of attaching to our party progressive Republicans who are in sympathy with us in so large a degree."
"Colonel" House played an important role in the campaign.
In October 1907, due to the intensity of alumni opposition, the Board of Trustees withdrew its support for the Quad Plan and instructed Wilson to withdraw it.
Wilson drew praise when he succeeded in wringing from Germany a pledge to constrain their U-boat warfare to the rules of cruiser warfare.
This law was considered the "Magna Carta" of labor by Samuel Gompers because it ended union liability antitrust laws.
In February 1890, with the help of friends, Wilson was elected by the Princeton University board to the Chair of Jurisprudence and Political Economy, at an annual salary of $3,000.
" divided up, as it were, into forty-seven seignories, in each of which a Standing Committee is the court-baron and its chairman lord-proprietor.
A devoted Presbyterian, Wilson infused morality into his internationalism, an ideology now referred to as "Wilsonian"—an activist foreign policy calling on the nation to promote global democracy.
Hughes won Minnesota by 393 votes out of over 358,000.
House had compromised Wilson's prior gains, and Wilson set out to attempt to regain the lost ground.
By January 16, 1919, the Eighteenth Amendment had been ratified by 36 of the 48 states it needed.
If government behaved badly, Wilson queried, "How is the schoolmaster, the nation, to know which boy needs the whipping?"
Wilson worked closely with Southern Democrats.
The studies culminated in a speech by Wilson to Congress on January 8, 1918, wherein he articulated America's long term war objectives.
Wilson chose to avoid risking escalation of the war as a result of the loss of one American.
Wilson also negotiated a treaty with Colombia in which the U.S. apologized for its role in the Panama Revolution of 1903–1904.
These interventions included Mexico in 1914, Haiti in 1915, the Dominican Republic in 1916, Cuba in 1917, and Panama in 1918.
In retirement, Wilson harbored hopes for a White House run in 1924 despite the absence of substantial support.
Wilson defended his administration's segregation policy in a July 1913 letter responding to Oswald Garrison Villard, publisher of the ''New York Evening Post'' and founding member of the NAACP; Wilson suggested the segregation removed "friction" between the races.
Wilson worked closely with Samuel Gompers and the AFL, the railroad brotherhoods, and other 'moderate' unions, which saw enormous growth in membership and wages during Wilson's administration.
Senator Lodge led the opposition to the treaty in the Republican controlled Senate; the key point of disagreement was whether the League would diminish the power of Congress to declare war.
He critically described the United States government, with frequent negative comparisons to Westminster.
Wilson felt Prohibition was unenforceable, but his veto of the Volstead Act was overridden by Congress.
She attempted an intolerable thing, and she must be made to pay for the attempt."
The pattern of Wilson's speechmaking was exemplified by his performances in Buffalo and New York City.
No one close to him, including his wife, his physician, or personal assistant, was willing to take responsibility to certify, as required by the Constitution, his "inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office".
No one around the President adequately clarified for him that he was too incapacitated, had insufficient support, and that the League defeat was irreversible.
Wilson had to get out of Mexico to deal with Germany and he ordered Pershing to withdraw from Mexico.
Along with his Supreme Court appointments, Wilson appointed 20 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals and 52 judges to the United States district courts.
Finally, a bipartisan group of 13 "irreconcilables" opposed a treaty in any form.
According to biographer August Heckscher, Ellen could sense a problem, and it became the topic of frank discussion between them.
Heckscher argues that Wilson had promised African Americans to deal generously with racial injustices, but did not deliver on these assurances.
Wilson initially rebuffed pleas from the Allies to dedicate military resources to an intervention in Russia against the Bolsheviks, based partially on his experience from attempted intervention in Mexico; nevertheless he ultimately was convinced of the potential benefit and agreed to dispatch a limited force to assist the Allies on the eastern front.
In terms of Reconstruction, Wilson held the common southern view that the South was demoralized by Northern carpetbaggers and that overreach on the part of the Radical Republicans justified extreme measures to reassert Democratic national and state governments.
They also argue that he idealized the slavery system in the South, viewing masters as patient with "indolent" slaves.
Wilson began a public campaign for the nomination in the South, with a speech to the Pewter Platter Club in Norfolk, Virginia.
The chase after Pancho Villa was a small military episode, but it had important long-term implications.
Wilson sent armed forces to assist the withdrawal of Czechoslovak Legions along the Trans-Siberian Railway, and to hold key port cities at Arkhangelsk and Vladivostok.
In addition, he pushed through Congress the Clayton Antitrust Act making certain business practices illegal, such as price discrimination, agreements prohibiting retailers from handling other companies' products, and directorates and agreements to control other companies.
Wilson wanted to integrate a proposed graduate school building into the campus core, while West preferred a more distant campus site.
He was at her bedside to the end, which came August 6, when Wilson despairingly said "Oh my God, what am I to do."
Meanwhile, Wilson requested and received funds in the final 1916 appropriations bill to provide for 500,000 troops.
He increased the faculty from 112 to 174, most of whom he selected himself on the basis of their records as outstanding teachers.
Edith Wilson enjoyed, as Ellen never had, the crowds and the power as a close collaborator with her husband.
The White Star liner the SS ''Arabic'' was then torpedoed, with two American casualties.
Wilson managed to maneuver through the complexities of local politics.
Wilson later took up golf.
In early 1916 Pancho Villa raided Columbus, an American town in New Mexico, killing eighteen Americans and causing an enormous nationwide American demand for his punishment.
The power of this legislation was greater than that of previous anti-trust laws since it dictated accountability of individual corporate officers and clarified guidelines.
By the end of 1913 many departments, including the Navy, had workspaces segregated by screens, and restrooms, cafeterias were segregated, although no executive order had been issued.
In 1906 Wilson awoke to find himself blind in the left eye, the result of a blood clot and hypertension.
The address was translated into many languages for global dissemination.
Wilson, renominated without opposition, employed his campaign slogan "He kept us out of war", though he never promised unequivocally to stay out of the war.
In doing so, Wilson broke with his predecessors' practice of litigating the antitrust issue in the courts, known as trust-busting; the new Federal Trade Commission provided a new regulatory approach, to encourage competition and reduce perceived unfair trade practices.
Wilson withdrew most of the soldiers on April 1, 1920, though some remained until as late as 1922.
He began to exhibit his father's traits of impatience and intolerance, which would on occasion lead to errors of judgment.
In May 1913, the Underwood Tariff passed in the House by a vote of 274 to 5; it would take a bit longer passing in the Senate—in September—and was signed by Wilson three weeks later.
He began formulating his reformist agenda, intending to ignore the demands of party machinery.
Wilson also established the first western propaganda office, the United States Committee on Public Information, headed by George Creel, the "Creel Commission", which circulated patriotic anti-German appeals and conducted censorship of materials considered seditious.
In a 1914 address to Congress, Wilson argued, "Such divisions amongst us would be fatal to our peace of mind and might seriously stand in the way of the proper performance of our duty as the one great nation at peace, the one people holding itself ready to play a part of impartial mediation and speak the counsels of peace and accommodation, not as a partisan, but as a friend."
It was evident by this time that the Wilson movement would not be checked.
To emphasize the development of expertise, Wilson instituted academic departments and a system of core requirements.
He summarized the growth of such foreign states as Prussia, France, and England, highlighting the events that led to advances in administration.
Then came the revelation of the Zimmermann Telegram, in which Germany attempted to enlist Mexico as an ally, promising Mexico that if Germany was victorious, she would support Mexico in winning back the states of Texas, New Mexico and Arizona from the U.S. Wilson's reaction after consulting the cabinet and the Congress was a minimal one – that diplomatic relations with the Germans be brought to a halt.
At Wilson's request, Owen highlighted federal legislation to promote workers' health and safety, prohibit child labour, provide unemployment compensation and establish minimum wages and maximum hours.
Wilson ran on his record and ignored Hughes, reserving his attacks for Roosevelt.
At the same time that Wilson's private world shattered, World War I broke out in Europe, and this momentously changed his political life.
In a Philadelphia speech that weekend Wilson said, "There is such a thing as a man being too proud to fight.
These and other bodies were headed by businessmen recruited by Wilson for a-dollar-a-day salary to make the government more efficient in the war effort.
In January 1918, Wilson went in person to the House and made a strong and widely published appeal to the House to pass the bill.
He next taught at Bryn Mawr College from 1885 until 1888, teaching ancient Greek and Roman history; while there, he refused offers from the universities of Michigan and Indiana.
Wilson named Paul Warburg and other prominent bankers to direct the new system.
Wilson's chief of staff ("Secretary") was Joseph Patrick Tumulty from 1913 to 1921, but he was largely upstaged after 1916 when Wilson's second wife, Edith Bolling Galt Wilson, assumed full control of Wilson's schedule.
For example, in Tennessee the Democratic Party was divided over Prohibition; Wilson was progressive and sober, but not dry, and appealed to both sides.
In 1944, Darryl F. Zanuck of 20th Century Fox produced a film titled ''Wilson''.
From its outset, Wilson became disenchanted with resistance to his recommendations at Princeton; he ruminated on future political leadership.
By the time Hughes' concession telegram arrived, Wilson commented "it was a little moth-eaten when it got here".
Wilson ignored Gen. Pershing's plea to drop the armistice and instead demand an unconditional surrender by Germany.
The new system began operations in 1915 and played a major role in financing the Allied and American war effort.
Robert Maddox wrote, "The immediate effect of the intervention was to prolong a bloody civil war, thereby costing thousands of additional lives and wreaking enormous destruction on an already battered society."
Antiwar groups, anarchists, communists, Industrial Workers of the World members, and other antiwar groups attempting to sabotage the war effort were targeted by the Department of Justice; many of their leaders were arrested for incitement to violence, espionage, or sedition.
The U.S. threatened a diplomatic break unless Germany repudiated the action; the German ambassador then conveyed a note, "liners will not be sunk by our submarines".
The Central Powers replied that victory was certain, and the Allies required the dismemberment of their enemies' empires; no desire for peace existed, and the offer lapsed.
In the campaign, McCombs was replaced as chairman of the Democratic Party by Vance C. McCormick, a leading progressive, and Ambassador Henry Morgenthau was recalled from Turkey to manage campaign finances.
Bridgman, editor of the ''Congregation and Christian World.''"
On October 28, 1919, Congress passed enabling legislation, the National Prohibition Act (informally known as the Volstead Act), to enforce the Eighteenth Amendment.
As a preliminary, he asked both sides to state their minimum terms necessary for future security.
Upon the outbreak of World War I in 1914, Wilson maintained a policy of neutrality, while pursuing a more aggressive policy in dealing with Mexico's civil war.
His father moved the family to Wilmington, North Carolina, in 1874 where he was the minister at First Presbyterian Church until 1882.
Wilson moved his private supply of alcoholic beverages to the wine cellar of his Washington residence after his term of office ended.
If it be divided, dealt out in share to many, it is obscured".
Other less charismatic contenders were Governor Judson Harmon of Ohio, and Representative Oscar Underwood of Alabama.
Further incidents led to the brink of war by late June when Wilson demanded an immediate release of American soldiers held prisoner.
Wilson's personal staff reflected his preferences; Tumulty's position provided a political buffer and intermediary with the press, and his irrepressible Irish spirits offset the president's often dour Scotch disposition.
After the conference, Wilson said that "at last the world knows America as the savior of the world!"
Segregation was urged by such conservative groups as the Fair Play Association.
Wilson was an avid baseball fan, and in 1915 became the first sitting president to attend, and throw out the first ball at, a World Series game.
He likened administration to a machine that functions independent of the changing mood of its leaders.
Through passage of the Adamson Act, imposing an 8-hour workday for railroads, he averted a railroad strike and an ensuing economic crisis.
Wilson appointed Joseph Patrick Tumulty as his private secretary, a position he held throughout Wilson's political career.
He served as the first permanent clerk of the southern church's General Assembly, was Stated Clerk for more than three decades from 1865 to 1898, and was Moderator of the PCUS General Assembly in 1879.
He proposed the United States enter the war to "vindicate principles of peace and justice in the life of the world as against selfish and autocratic power".
Essentially, the items under the discretion of administration must be limited in scope, as to not block, nullify, obfuscate, or modify the implementation of governmental decree made by the executive branch.
The declaration of war by the United States against Germany passed Congress by strong bipartisan majorities on April 4, 1917, with opposition from ethnic German strongholds and remote rural areas in the South.
He thought it time "to straighten the paths of government, to make its business less unbusinesslike, to strengthen and purify its organization, and it to crown its dutifulness".
He was confined to bed for weeks and sequestered from everyone except his wife and physician, Dr. Cary Grayson.
Another close member of Wilson's personal staff was his physician, Navy medical officer Cary T. Grayson.
The purchase of wartime bonds had the result of shifting the cost of the war to the taxpayers of the affluent 1920s.
They united behind him to win the presidential election in the state, but divided over state politics and lost the gubernatorial election.
Revolutionaries in Russia resented the United States intrusion.
In the summer of 1914 Wilson gained repeal of toll exemptions at the Panama Canal for American ships; this was received positively by the international community, as a cessation of past discrimination against foreign commerce.
When Wilson began vacationing in Bermuda in 1906, he met a socialite, Mary Hulbert Peck.
The last American soldiers left on February 5, 1917.
Mrs. Wilson stayed in the home another 37 years, dying there at age 89 on December 28, 1961, which was Woodrow's birthday and the day she was to be the guest of honor at the opening of the Woodrow Wilson Bridge across the Potomac River near Washington.
The national press covered the confrontation as a battle between the elites, represented by West, versus the populists, represented by Wilson.
It was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1985.
Wilson took 41.8% of the popular vote and won 435 electoral votes from 40 states.
Senator James Smith, Jr. and George Harvey as the potential Democratic standard bearer in the upcoming gubernatorial election.
In an early foreign policy matter, Wilson responded to an angry protest by the Japanese when the state of California proposed legislation that excluded Japanese people from land ownership in the state.
Wilson left his daughter Margaret an annuity of $2,500 annually for as long as she remained unmarried, and left to his daughters what had been his first wife's personal property.
In his acceptance speech on September 2, 1916, Wilson pointedly warned Germany that submarine warfare resulting in American deaths would not be tolerated, saying "The nation that violates these essential rights must expect to be checked and called to account by direct challenge and resistance.
John Maynard Keynes, an anti-Wilson and anti-League intellectual, asserted Wilson was not well regarded at the Conference, "he was in many respects...ill-informed as to European conditions...his mind was slow and unadaptable...There can seldom have been a statesman of the first rank more incompetent than the President in the agilities of the council chamber."
A section of the Rambla of Montevideo, Uruguay, is named Rambla Presidente Wilson.
He is the center of it—the biggest Democrat in the country—the leader and the chief".
After Norfolk, Wilson then proceeded westward to Kansas, Colorado, California, Oregon and Washington; he favored voting reforms which empowered the populace, such as the initiative, the referendum and the recall (excepting judges).
In the election of 1910, he was the gubernatorial candidate of New Jersey's Democratic Party, and was elected the 34th Governor of New Jersey, serving from 1911 to 1913.
After less than a year, he abandoned the practice to pursue his study of political science and history.
In 1919, Wilson guided American foreign policy to "acquiesce" in the Balfour Declaration without supporting Zionism in an official way.
During these "dark days" of the conference Taft cabled to Wilson three proposed amendments to the League covenant which he thought would considerably increase its acceptability to the Europeans—the right of withdrawal from the League, the exemption of domestic issues from the League and the inviolability of the Monroe Doctrine.
When Martine won the seat, Wilson had manifestly positioned himself as a new leader in the party in that state.
Shadow Lawn, the Summer White House for Wilson during his term in office, became part of Monmouth University in 1956.
Wilson continued to defend his policy, as in a letter to "prominent black minister Rev.
In Europe the words were received by the British and the French without comment.
Wilson also made quick work of realizing his pledges to beef up antitrust regulation and to bring reform to banking and currency matters.
Wilson also studied public administration, which he called "government in action; it is the executive, the operative, the most visible side of government, and is of course as old as government itself".
Wilson's presidential papers and his personal library are at the Library of Congress.
War between the United States and Mexico was averted through negotiations, and in 1916 his reelection campaign for president boasted he had "kept us out of war."
In 1899, Wilson wrote in "The State" that governments could legitimately promote the general welfare "by forbidding child labor, by supervising the sanitary conditions of factories, by limiting the employment of women in occupations hurtful to their health, by instituting official tests of the purity or the quality of goods sold, by limiting the hours of labor in certain trades, and by a hundred and one limitations of the power of unscrupulous or heartless men to out-do the scrupulous and merciful in trade or industry."
After closing the family home in Rome, Georgia, and recovering from the initial shock, Ellen gained admission to the Art Students League of New York.
Early in 1917 the German ambassador Johann von Bernstorf informed Secretary of State Lansing of Germany's commitment to unrestricted submarine warfare; Bernstorff had tears in his eyes as he knew the U.S. reaction would adversely affect his country's lot.
During Wilson's presidency, the film ''The Birth of a Nation'' (1915) became the first motion picture to be in screened in the White House.
Wilson also wrote that charity efforts should be removed from the private domain and "made the imperative legal duty of the whole," a position which, according to Robert M. Saunders, seemed to indicate that Wilson "was laying the groundwork for the modern welfare state."
As the election of 1920 approached, Wilson momentarily imagined that a deadlocked Democratic convention might nominate him for a third term with a campaign focused on the League of Nations.
Mrs. Wilson left the home and much of the contents to the National Trust for Historic Preservation to be made into a museum honoring her husband.
He thought such attitudes represented the requirements of smaller countries and populations.
Both parties claimed contract violations and the matter subsided.
Wilson had not waited for completion of the tariff legislation to proceed with his next item of reform—banking—which he initiated in June 1913.
Wilson delivered his ''War Message'' to a special session of Congress on April 2, 1917, declaring that Germany's latest pronouncement had rendered his "armed neutrality" policy untenable and asking Congress to declare Germany's war stance was an act of war.
A Constitutional amendment passed both houses in December 1917 by 2/3 votes.
Wilson appealed to African Americans and promised to work for them, gaining some support among them in the North at the expense of the Republicans.
The U.S. supported the transition that brought about the election of Francisco I. Madero.
Not long afterward, Wilson suffered a recurrence of his 1906 ailment; as before, a vacation was prescribed and proved beneficial.
In December 1916, a month after his reelection, Wilson (a noted supporter of mother's pensions) addressed a conference on social insurance in which he spoke of how a conference like that gave evidence of "the dominant interest of our own time, and one of the best elements of social insurance is social understanding – an interchange of views and a comprehension of interests which for a long time was only too rare."
Such a line of demarcation is intended to focus responsibility for actions taken on the people or persons in charge.
Additionally, Wilson became the first lecturer of Constitutional Law at New York Law School, where he taught with Charles Evans Hughes.
Public opinion was mixed, with intense opposition from most Republicans, Germans, and Irish Catholic Democrats.
The U.S. raised a massive army through conscription and Wilson gave command to General John J. Pershing, with complete authority as to tactics, strategy and some diplomacy.
The chances were less than favorable for ratification of the treaty by a two-thirds vote of the Republican Senate.
It was the clearest expression of intention made by any of the belligerent nations.
Wilson also hoped that the parties could be reorganized along ideological, not geographic, lines.
Wilson aspired, as he told alumni, "to transform thoughtless boys performing tasks into thinking men".
In the exchange of notes with Germany they agreed the Fourteen Points in principle be incorporated in the armistice; House then procured agreement from France and Britain, but only after threatening to conclude a unilateral armistice without them.
Wilson quickly shed his professorial style for more emboldened speechmaking, and presented himself as a full-fledged progressive.
