In the 1970s, Allen wrote a number of one-act plays, most notably ''God'' and ''Death'', which were published in his 1975 collection ''Without Feathers''.
In an interview on ''The Dick Cavett Show'', Allen brought up the incident again where he repeated his comments and stated that the sum for which he was sued was "$1&nbsp;million."
Titled ''Crisis in Six Scenes'', it stars Allen alongside Elaine May and Miley Cyrus.
His success continued with ''Play It Again, Sam'', which opened in 1969, starring Allen and Diane Keaton.
In 1969, Allen cast Diane Keaton in his Broadway show, ''Play It Again, Sam.''
In 1997, rumors of Allen returning to the theatre to write a starring role for his wife Soon-Yi Previn turned out to be false.
His film ''Manhattan Murder Mystery'' (1993) combined suspense with dark comedy and marked the return of Diane Keaton, Alan Alda and Anjelica Huston.
Opened to critical acclaim, the film earned Allen another Academy Award nomination for Best Original Screenplay, and Blanchett went to receive the Academy Award for Best Actress.
Allen made one sitcom "appearance" via telephone on the show ''Just Shoot Me!''
It will be available exclusively on Amazon Prime Instant Video, and Amazon Studios has already ordered a full season.
Dylan's brother, Moses, currently a family therapist, told ''People'' magazine, "Of course Woody did not molest my sister... She loved him and looked forward to seeing him when he would visit."
Eric Lax authored the book ''Woody Allen: A Biography''.
Billy Graham and William F. Buckley.
Allen has said that he "survives" on the European market.
Allen's first directorial effort was ''What's Up, Tiger Lily?''
It is said that the role was written for her, as Diane Keaton's birth name was Diane Hall.
During this decade, Allen also starred in the television film ''The Sunshine Boys'' (1995), based on the Neil Simon play of the same name.
This uneasy onstage naturalness became a trademark."
Allen stated that the film would cost between $80 and $100&nbsp;million and is therefore unlikely to be made.
Audiences there tend to be more receptive to his films, particularly in Spain, France and Italy—countries where he has a large audience (joked about in ''Hollywood Ending'').
Some of his films, such as ''Annie Hall'', jokingly include references to psychoanalysis.
''The Purple Rose of Cairo'' was named by ''Time'' as one of the 100 best films of all time and Allen described it as one of his three best films, along with ''Stardust Memories'' and ''Match Point'' (Allen defines them as "best" not in terms of quality but because they came closest to his vision).
Between ''Annie Hall'' and ''Manhattan'', Allen wrote and directed the dark drama ''Interiors'' (1978), in the style of Swedish director Ingmar Bergman, one of Allen's chief influences.
Dylan said that the abuse took place in the attic.
It opened on April 10, 2014 and closed on August 24, 2014.
''Small Time Crooks'' was a relative financial success, grossing over $17 million domestically but Allen's next four films foundered at the box office, including Allen's most costly film, ''The Curse of the Jade Scorpion'' (with a budget of $26 million).
His reputation is not a dead shark but an albatross, which with admirable economy Allen has arranged for the critics to carry around their own necks."
''September'' resembles ''Autumn Sonata''.
They married on December 23, 1997, and have adopted two daughters.
For many years, Allen wanted to make a film about the origins of jazz in New Orleans.
Allen started writing short stories and cartoon captions for magazines such as ''The New Yorker''; he was inspired by the tradition of  ''New Yorker'' humorists S. J. Perelman, George S. Kaufman, Robert Benchley and Max Shulman, whose material he modernized.
Woody gave his godson Quincy Rose a small part in ''Melinda and Melinda''.
''Blue Jasmine'' debuted in July 2013.
Rosen had been sexually assaulted outside her apartment and according to Allen, the newspapers reported that she "had been violated".
His first great success was ''Don't Drink the Water'', which opened in 1968, and ran for 598 performances for almost two years on Broadway.
My guess is that Roy Price the head of Amazon Studios will regret this."
''Match Point'' earned Allen his first Academy Award nomination since 1998, for Best Writing&nbsp;– Original Screenplay, with directing and writing nominations at the Golden Globes, his first Globe nominations since 1987.
described as a dark comedy, follows the story of a botched suicide attempt turned messy love triangle.
Soon-Yi Previn was the adopted daughter of Farrow and her former husband, composer André Previn.
According to Allen, his first published joke read: "Woody Allen says he ate at a restaurant that had O.P.S.
Since the end of their romantic relationship, Keaton and Allen remain close friends.
In an interview with journalist Katie Couric, Keaton does not deny that Allen wrote the part for her and about her.
Despite two Tony Award nominations, a Tony win for the acting of Brian Backer (who won the 1981 Theater World Award and a Drama Desk Award for his work), the play only ran for 62 performances.
In April 2008, he began filming a story focused more toward older audiences starring Larry David, Patricia Clarkson  and Evan Rachel Wood.
Allen has a sister, Letty, who was born in 1943; they were raised in Midwood, Brooklyn.
''Annie Hall'' set the standard for modern romantic comedy and ignited a fashion trend with the clothes worn by Diane Keaton in the film.
From July through August 2014, Allen filmed the mystery drama ''Irrational Man'' in Newport, Rhode Island, with Joaquin Phoenix, Emma Stone, Parker Posey and Jamie Blackley.
Allen spoke German quite a bit in his early years.
"He showed me the ropes and I followed his lead.
When Allen wrote for other comedians, they would use eight out of ten of his jokes.
In 1962 alone he estimated that he wrote twenty thousand jokes for various comics.
I don't know what I'm doing.
While attending Hebrew school for eight years, he went to Public School 99 (now the Isaac Asimov School for Science and Literature) and to Midwood High School, where he graduated in 1953.
Ronan's paternity came into question, however, after Farrow claimed in 2013 that he might in fact be the biological child of Frank Sinatra, her first husband, with whom she "never really split up," she said.
He returned to lighter movies like ''Bullets over Broadway'' (1994), which earned an Academy Award nomination for Best Director, followed by a musical, ''Everyone Says I Love You'' (1996).
His 1991 film ''Shadows and Fog'' is a black-and-white homage to the German expressionists and features the music of Kurt Weill.
In 2004, Allen's first full-length play since 1981, ''A Second Hand Memory'', was directed by Allen and enjoyed an extended run Off-Broadway.
4 on the AFI list of "100 Best Comedies."
One of those writers was Abe Burrows, coauthor of ''Guys and Dolls'', who wrote, "Wow!
The film follows a young engaged couple in Paris who see their lives transformed.
He enjoyed writing, however, despite the work: "Nothing makes me happier than to tear open a ream of paper.
Allen began writing short jokes when he was 15, and the following year began sending them to various Broadway writers to see if they'd be interested in buying any.
While best known for his films, Allen has enjoyed a successful career in theatre, starting as early as 1960, when he wrote sketches for the revue ''From A to Z''.
Later, he learned via self-study rather than in the classroom.
In October 2011, Woody Allen's one-act play called ''Honeymoon Motel'' premiered as one in a series of one act plays on Broadway titled ''Relatively Speaking''.
Set in London, it starred Jonathan Rhys Meyers and Scarlett Johansson.
In a 2006 interview with ''Premiere Magazine'', Allen stated this was the best film he has ever made.
The documentary film ''Wild Man Blues'' (directed by Barbara Kopple) documents a 1996 European tour by Allen and his band, as well as his relationship with Previn.
After co-starring alongside Allen in the subsequent film version of ''Play It Again, Sam'', she would later co-star in ''Sleeper'', ''Love and Death'', ''Interiors'', ''Manhattan'' and ''Annie Hall''.
Farrow told the court that Allen was an “excellent father,” although the children lived with her.
In the early 1960s, Allen began performing as a stand-up comedian, emphasizing monologues rather than traditional jokes.
Some best-known of his over 40 films are ''Annie Hall'' (1977), ''Manhattan'' (1979), and ''Hannah and Her Sisters'' (1986).
Allen and his band played the Montreal International Jazz Festival on two consecutive nights in June 2008.
The film was structured in four vignettes featuring dialogue in both Italian and English.
Allen was interviewed by ''60 Minutes'' a few months following the allegation, when he described the custody battle, heated exchanges, and the allegations.
The comedy ''Mighty Aphrodite'' (1995), in which Greek drama plays a large role, won an Academy Award for Mira Sorvino.
Allen says his psychoanalysis ended around the time he began his relationship with Previn, although he is still claustrophobic and agoraphobic.
At the age of 17, he legally changed his name to '''Heywood Allen''' and later began to call himself Woody Allen.
Allen was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2001.
For its March 21, 1969, issue, ''Life'' featured Allen on its cover.
''Midnight in Paris'' won the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay.
''You Will Meet a Tall Dark Stranger'', filmed in London, stars Antonio Banderas, Josh Brolin, Anthony Hopkins, Anupam Kher, Freida Pinto and Naomi Watts.
Allen was denied visitation rights with Malone and could see Ronan only under supervision.
Allen first appeared on the ''Tonight Show ''in November 1963.
"In the United States things have changed a lot, and it's hard to make good small films now," Allen said in a 2004 interview.
Allen's short, ''Oedipus Wrecks'', is about a neurotic lawyer and his critical mother.
As a result, Farrow realized that Allen was having an affair with Soon-Yi.
Allen was born '''Allan Stewart Konigsberg''' in The Bronx, and was raised in Brooklyn, New York, the son of Nettie (née Cherry; November 8, 1906 – January 27, 2002), a bookkeeper at her family's delicatessen, and Martin Konigsberg (December 25, 1900 – January 8, 2001), a jewelry engraver and waiter.
Woody Allen and his New Orleans Jazz Band have been playing each Monday evening at Manhattan's Carlyle Hotel for many years (as of 2011, specializing in classic New Orleans jazz from the early twentieth century).
The play opened on February 12, 1969, and ran for 453 performances.
Cyrus plays the part of a radical hippie fugitive who sells marijuana.
Dylan, his seven-year-old daughter, later told Mia Farrow that he molested her during that visit.
In 1966, Allen wrote the play ''Don't Drink the Water''.
As a comedian, he developed the persona of an insecure, intellectual, fretful nebbish, which he maintains is quite different from his real-life personality.
In his act, Allen said that Rosen sued him because of a joke he made in an interview.
From 1960 to 1969, Allen performed as a stand-up comedian to supplement his comedy writing.
Still his earnestness and the obvious regard he has for traditional jazz counts for something."
Then Mort Sahl came along with a whole new style of humor, opening up vistas for people like me."
The next play Allen wrote for Broadway was ''Play It Again, Sam'', in which he also starred.
In 1971 Allen hosted ''The Tonight Show'', which included as guests Bob Hope and James Coco.
Allen has said that this film, as well as the next three he has planned, have the financing and full support of Sony Pictures Classics.
He subsequently released three LP albums of live nightclub recordings: the self-titled ''Woody Allen'' (1964), ''Volume 2'' (1965), and ''The Third Woody Allen Album'' (1968) recorded at a fund-raiser for Senator Eugene McCarthy's presidential run.
And he did not improvise: "I put very little premium on improvisation," he told Studs Terkel.
In 1981, Allen's play ''The Floating Light Bulb'' opened on Broadway.
His parents were both born and raised on the Lower East Side of Manhattan.
His production of the opera opened the Festival of Two Worlds in Spoleto, Italy, in June 2009.
Allen's biographer, John Baxter, wrote, "Allen obviously found analysis stimulating, even exciting."
Times'' suggested that Allen should be regarded as a competent musical hobbyist with a sincere appreciation for early jazz: "Allen's clarinet won't make anyone forget Sidney Bechet, Barney Bigard or Evan Christopher.
After Allen was taken under the wing of his new manager, Jack Rollins, who had recently discovered Nichols and May, Rollins suggested he perform his written jokes as a stand-up.
Fox and Mayim Bialik.
From 1976 to 1984, Stuart Hample wrote and drew ''Inside Woody Allen'', a comic strip based on Allen's film persona.
Allen did not adopt any of Farrow's other children, including Soon-Yi.
His stuff was dazzling."
He works very hard," Keaton has stated.
Filming started in July 2009.
''Stardust Memories'' was based on ''8½'', which it parodies, and ''Wild Strawberries''.
His jokes were created from life experiences, and typically presented with a dead serious demeanor which made them funnier: "I don't think my family liked me.
He acted "normal", dressed casually, and made no attempt to project a stage "personality".
''Sleeper'' was the first of four films where the screenplay was co-written by Allen and Marshall Brickman.
Unlike Bruce and Sahl, he did not discuss current events such as civil rights, women's rights, the Cold War, or Vietnam.
He was later hired as a full-time writer for humorist Herb Shriner, initially earning $25 a week.
The band has released two CDs: ''The Bunk Project'' (1993) and the soundtrack of ''Wild Man Blues'' (1997).
Comedy screenwriter Larry Gelbart compared Allen's style to Elaine May: "He just styled himself completely after her," he said.
Allen believes this to be one of his best films.
Allen directed, starred in, and co-wrote (with Mickey Rose) ''Take the Money and Run'' in 1969, which received positive reviews.
Allen combined tragic and comic elements in such films as ''Hannah and Her Sisters'' (1985) and ''Crimes and Misdemeanors'' (1989), in which he tells two stories that connect at the end.
It featured Diane Keaton and Roberts.
These are ''Getting Even'', ''Without Feathers'', ''Side Effects'', and ''Mere Anarchy''.
After writing for many of television's leading comedians and comedy shows, Allen was gaining the reputation for being a "genius", says composer Mary Rodgers.
Allen tells a different story on his mid-1960s standup album ''Standup Comic''.
The film earned more than $23 million domestically (more than any of his films in nearly 20 years) and over $62 million in international box office sales.
Allen and Farrow engaged in a heated and emotionally damaging custody battle after they broke up in January 1992, during which time Farrow alleged that he once sexually abused their daughter, which he has denied.
While receiving mixed reviews, it gave an autobiographical insight into Allen's childhood, specifically his fascination with magic tricks.
The case was dropped in 1993 after a seven-month probe by a police-appointed medical team concluded that Dylan had not been molested.
The lovehate opinion of cerebral persons found in ''Manhattan'' is characteristic of many of Allen's movies, including ''Crimes and Misdemeanors'' and ''Annie Hall.''
In February 2014, Dylan Farrow repeated the allegation in an open letter published by Nicholas Kristof, one of Farrow's friends, in his ''New York Times'' blog.
The production marked the stage-directing debut for Allen.
''Manhattan'' focuses on the complicated relationship between middle-aged Isaac Davis (Allen) with 17-year-old Tracy (Mariel Hemingway), and co-stars Diane Keaton.
Allen also wrote for the  ''Candid Camera'' television show, and appeared in some episodes.
His short pleased critics, but ''New York Stories'' bombed at the box office.
Rosen, whom Allen referred to in his standup act as "the Dread Mrs. Allen", sued him for defamation due to comments at a TV appearance shortly after their divorce.
They put a live teddy bear in my crib."
Following Allen's separation from Farrow, and after a bitter custody battle, she won custody of their children.
In 1987, she had a cameo as a nightclub singer in ''Radio Days'', and was chosen to replace Mia Farrow in the co-starring role for ''Manhattan Murder Mystery'' after Allen and Farrow began having troubles with their personal and working relationship while making this film.
Unlike other comedians, Allen spoke to his audiences in a low-key conversational style, often appearing to be searching for words, although his style was well rehearsed.
Dylan denies she was ever coached by her mother and stands by her allegations.
Allen and Mia Farrow, though unmarried, jointly adopted two children: Dylan Farrow (who changed her name to Eliza and later to Malone) and Moshe Farrow (known as Moses); they also had one biological child, Satchel Farrow (known as Ronan).
The singing and dancing scenes in ''Everyone Says I Love You'' are similar to musicals starring Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers.
The film is similar to the 1942 film ''Larceny, Inc.'' (from a play by S.J.
After high school, he attended New York University, studying communication and film in 1953, before dropping after failing the course "Motion Picture Production".
He plays songs by Sidney Bechet, George Lewis, Johnny Dodds, Jimmie Noone and Louis Armstrong.
In 1967, Allen played Jimmy Bond in the 007 spoof ''Casino Royale''.
It debuted at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival on May 12, 2011.
After a long hiatus from the stage, Allen returned to the theatre in 1995, with the one-act ''Central Park West'', an installment in an evening of theatre known as ''Death Defying Acts'' that was also made up of new work by David Mamet and Elaine May.
In 2003, Allen finally returned to the stage with ''Writer's Block'', an evening of two one-acts—''Old Saybrook'' and ''Riverside Drive''—that played Off-Broadway.
At that time, he lived in an apartment at 968 East 14th Street.
His screenplay for ''Annie Hall'' was named the funniest screenplay by the Writers Guild of America in its list of the "101 Funniest Screenplays."
Though he had a 12-year on and off romantic relationship with actress Mia Farrow, the two never married.
Allen was resistant at first, but after seeing Mort Sahl on stage, he felt safer to give it a try: "I'd never had the nerve to talk about it before.
Burrows then wrote Allen letters of introduction to Sid Caesar, Phil Silvers, and Peter Lind Hayes, who immediately sent Allen a check for just the jokes Burrows included as samples.
Allen brought innovation to the comedy monologue genre and his stand-up comedy would be considered influential.
And I can't wait to fill it!
''Interiors'' represented a departure from Allen's "early, funny" comedies (a line from 1980's ''Stardust Memories'').
Commenting on his direction of the opera, Allen said, "I have no idea what I'm doing."
Those films eventually became ''Bananas'' (1971, co-written with Rose), ''Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex*'' (1972), ''Sleeper'' (1973), and ''Love and Death'' (1975).
Lasser appeared in three Allen films shortly after the divorce—''Take the Money and Run'', ''Bananas'', and ''Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex* (*But Were Afraid to Ask)''—and later briefly appeared in ''Stardust Memories''.
As a result of the jokes Allen mailed to various writers, he was invited, then age 19, to join the NBC Writer's Development Program in 1955, followed by a job on ''The NBC Comedy Hour'' in Los Angeles.
Allen then made his critically acclaimed comedy-drama drama ''Husbands and Wives'' (1992), which received two Oscar nominations: Best Supporting Actress for Judy Davis and Best Original Screenplay for Allen.
Moses, who was then 15, chose not to see Allen but by age 36 he had become estranged from his mother and reestablished his relationship with Allen and his sister.
Comedy historian Gerald Nachman notes that Allen, while not the first to do stand-up, would eventually have greater impact than all the others in the 1960s, and would redefine the meaning of stand-up comedy: "He helped turn it into biting, brutally honest satirical commentary on the cultural and psychological tenor of the times."
(1966, co-written with Mickey Rose), in which an existing Japanese spy movie—''Kokusai himitsu keisatsu: Kagi no kagi'' (1965), "International Secret Police: Key of Keys"—was redubbed in English by Allen and friends with fresh new, comic dialogue.
A production of ''God'' was staged at The Bank of Brazil Cultural Center in Rio de Janeiro, and theatrical adaptations of Allen's films ''Bullets Over Broadway'' and ''September'' were produced in Italy and France, respectively, without Allen's involvement.
The musical closed on August 24, 2014, after 156 performances and 33 previews.
At the 2015 Cannes Film Festival, Allen said, in reference to his upcoming Amazon show, "It was a catastrophic mistake.
In June 2007, it was announced that Allen would make two more creative debuts in the theatre, directing a work that he did not write and directing an opera — a reinterpretation of Puccini's ''Gianni Schicchi'' for the Los Angeles Opera—which debuted at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion on September 6, 2008.
The film is set in San Francisco and New York, and stars Alec Baldwin, Cate Blanchett, Louis C.K., Andrew Dice Clay, Sally Hawkins, and Peter Sarsgaard.
Farrow tried to have Allen's two adoptions with her nullified, but the court decided in Allen's favor and he continues to be their legal father.
I have no ideas and I'm not sure where to begin.
''Annie Hall'' was very important in Allen and Keaton's careers.
''The Front'' was a humorous and poignant account of Hollywood blacklisting during the 1950s; Ritt, screenwriter Walter Bernstein, and three of Allen's cast-mates, Samuel "Zero" Mostel, Herschel Bernardi, and Lloyd Gough, had all themselves been actual blacklisting victims.
Farrow filed charges with the police.
For the next few years, Allen had no direct involvement with the stage, yet notable productions of his work were staged.
It was announced in February 2012 that Allen would adapt ''Bullets over Broadway'' into a Broadway musical.
''Time'' stated that the years were "nettling" and "unsettling."
Along with that show, he wrote jokes for the Buddy Hackett sitcom ''Stanley'' and ''The Pat Boone Chevy Showroom''.
The film is ranked at No.
I expect this to be a cosmic embarrassment."
She then starred in ''Interiors'' as a poet, followed by ''Manhattan''.
He eventually taught at The New School.
In 1972, Allen wrote and starred in the film version of ''Play It Again, Sam'', directed by Herbert Ross and co-starring Diane Keaton.
"I just wanted it to be the way I saw Paris – Paris through my eyes," he added.
''Moment Magazine'' says, "It drove his self-absorbed work."
Allen's 1980s films, even the comedies, have somber and philosophical undertones, with their influences being the works of European directors, specifically Ingmar Bergman and Federico Fellini.
Because he was not particularly happy with the 1969 film version of his play, in 1994, Allen directed and starred in a second version for television, with Michael J.
Keaton has not worked with Allen since ''Manhattan Murder Mystery.''
The following month, January 1992, Farrow was at Allen's home and came across nude photos of her other adopted daughter, 21-year-old Soon-Yi Previn, which were taken by Allen.
Penélope Cruz received the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for her role in the film.
After his relationship with Mia Farrow ended acrimoniously in 1992, Allen and Soon-Yi continued their relationship and she moved in with Allen.
Soon-Yi, who was born in Korea, was a child when her mother abandoned her by leaving her on a street in the slums of Seoul.
The production sold out the entire run.
