The earliest known members of Proboscidea, the clade which contains modern elephants, existed about 55 million years ago around the Tethys Sea.
Güyük, the 13th-century Khan of the Mongols, is reputed to have sat on a throne made from mammoth ivory.
Individuals and populations showing transitional morphologies between each of the mammoth species are known, and primitive and derived species coexisted as well until the former disappeared.
This name is Latin for "first elephant".
Gallon added that the fur-trapper had not heard of mammoths before.
The sheaths of the tusks were parallel and spaced closely.
Woolly mammoths had several adaptations to the cold, most noticeably the layer of fur covering all parts of the body.
Adams recovered the entire skeleton, apart from the tusks, which Shumachov had already sold, and one foreleg, most of the skin, and nearly 18&nbsp;kg (40&nbsp;lb) of hair.
Similar mutations are known in other Arctic mammals, such as reindeer.
Apart from frozen remains, the only soft tissue known is from a specimen that was preserved in a petroleum seep in Starunia, Poland.
p. alaskensis'' have been proposed.
When the last set of molars was worn out, the animal would be unable to chew and feed, and it would die of starvation.
The best indication of sex is the size of the pelvic girdle, since the opening that functions as the birth canal is always wider in females than in males.
When inserted into human cells, the mammoth's version of the protein was found to be less sensitive to heat than the elephant's.
meridionalis'' about 2–1.7 million years ago.
To be able to process the ivory, the large tusks had to be chopped, chiselled and split into smaller, more manageable pieces.
Many mammoth carcasses may have been scavenged by humans rather than hunted.
The ridges were wear-resistant to enable the animal to chew large quantities of food, which often contained grit.
Many are certainly known to have been killed in rivers, perhaps through being swept away by floods.
The specimen was nicknamed the "Jarkov mammoth".
It is one of the best preserved mammoths ever found due to the almost complete head, covered in skin, but without the trunk.
The Kunstkamera, the museum established by Peter the Great, contained the skeleton of an Indian elephant that could be used as reference.
Like modern elephants, woolly mammoths were likely very social and lived in matriarchal (female-led) family groups.
The former is thought to be the ancestor of later forms.
This environment stretched across northern Asia, many parts of Europe, and the northern part of North America during the last ice age.
Females averaged  in height and weighed up to .
Studies of an 11,300–11,000-year-old trackway in south-western Canada showed that ''M.
He examined the carcass and realised what was left would still be the most complete mammoth recovered by that time.
The first woolly mammoth remains studied by European scientists were examined by Hans Sloane in 1728 and consisted of fossilised teeth and tusks from Siberia.
Woolly mammoth tusks had been articles of trade in Asia long before Europeans became acquainted with them.
Preserved woolly mammoth fur is orange-brown, but this is believed to be an artefact from the bleaching of pigment during burial.
The fact that sperm cells of modern mammals are potent for 15 years at most after deep-freezing is a hindrance to this method.
A 2008 study estimated that changes in climate shrank suitable mammoth habitat from  42,000 years ago to  6,000 years ago.
Mammoths derived from ''M.
Woolly mammoth fossils have been found in many different types of deposits, including former rivers and lakes, and also in "Doggerland" in the North Sea, which was dry at times during the ice age.
Their skin was no thicker than that of present-day elephants, between .
In this way, most of the weight would have been close to the skull, and there would be less torque than with straight tusks.
A 2014 study concluded that forbs (a group of herbaceous plants) were more important in the steppe-tundra than previously acknowledged, and that it was a primary food source for the ice-age megafauna.
p. sibiricus'', ''M.
They had a layer of fat up to  thick under the skin, which helped to keep them warm.
The time and resources required would be enormous, and the scientific benefits would be unclear, suggesting these resources should instead be used to preserve extant elephant species which are endangered.
As the woolly mammoth genome has been fully sequenced, it may be possible to recreate a complete set of woolly mammoth chromosomes in the future by adding mammoth-only sequences to Asian elephant chromosomes, which represents a more feasible but extremely difficult and expensive means of recreating the species.
Woolly mammoths sustained themselves on plant food, mainly grass and sedges, which were supplemented with herbaceous plants, flowering plants, shrubs, mosses, and tree matter.
The indigenous peoples of North America also used woolly mammoth ivory and bone for tools and art.
With the disappearance of mammoths, birch forests, which absorb more sunlight than grasslands, expanded, leading to regional warming.
Some accumulations are also thought to be the remains of herds that died together at the same time, perhaps due to flooding.
It had long, curved tusks and four molars, which were replaced six times during the lifetime of an individual.
Mammoths frequently ate birch trees, creating a grassland habitat.
The two-fingered tip of the trunk was probably adapted for picking up the short grasses of the last ice age (Quaternary glaciation, 2.58 million years ago to present) by wrapping around them, whereas modern elephants curl their trunks around the longer grass of their tropical environments.
The most famous frozen specimen from Alaska is a calf nicknamed "Effie", which was found in 1948.
This is indicated on many preserved tusks by flat, polished sections up to  long on the part of the surface that would have reached the ground.
Some huts included fireplaces, which used bones as fuel, probably because wood was scarce.
The southernmost woolly mammoth specimen known is from the Shandong province of China, and is 33,000 years old.
Inspired by the Siberian natives' concept of the mammoth as an underground creature, it became  recorded in the Chinese pharmaceutical encyclopedia, ''Ben Cao Gangmu'', as ''yin shu'', "the hidden rodent".
The trunk could also be used for pulling off large grass tufts, delicately picking buds and flowers, and tearing off leaves and branches where trees and shrubs were present.
By March 2015, woolly mammoth genes had been copied into the genome of an Asian elephant, using the CRISPR DNA editing technique.
In 2012, proteins were confidently identified for the first time, collected from a 43,000-year-old woolly mammoth.
In the late 19th century, there were persistent rumours about surviving mammoths in Alaska.
The best preserved head of a frozen adult specimen, that of a male nicknamed the "Yukagir mammoth", shows that woolly mammoths had temporal glands between the ear and the eye.
Schumachov let it thaw until he could retrieve the tusks for sale to the ivory trade.
At the same time, the skulls became shorter from front to back to minimise the weight of the head.
Often such finds were kept secret due to superstition.
Others interpreted Sloane's conclusion slightly differently, arguing the flood had carried elephants from the Tropics to the Arctic.
A 2015 study suggested that the animals in the range where ''M.
Resolutions to historical issues about the validity of the genus name ''Mammuthus'' and the type species designation of ''E.
primigenius'' were also proposed.
It was similar to the grassy steppes of modern Russia, but the flora was more diverse, abundant, and grew faster.
Mammoths may have formed large herds more often, since animals that live in open areas are more likely to do this than those in forested areas.
It was covered in fur, with an outer covering of long guard hairs and a shorter undercoat.
It disappeared from its mainland range at the end of the Pleistocene 10,000 years ago, most likely through climate change and consequent shrinkage of its habitat, hunting by humans, or a combination of the two.
Sloane turned to another biblical explanation for the presence of elephants in the Arctic, asserting that they had been buried during the Great Flood, and that Siberia had previously been tropical prior to a drastic climate change.
Most populations disappeared between 14,000 and 10,000 years ago.
Woolly mammoths needed a varied diet to support their growth, like modern elephants.
While frozen woolly mammoth carcasses had been excavated by Europeans as early as 1728, the first fully documented specimen was discovered near the delta of the Lena River in 1799 by Ossip Schumachov, a Siberian hunter.
The paralectotype molar (specimen GZG.V.010.018) has since been located in the Göttingen University collection, identified by comparing it with Osborn's illustration of a cast.
The woolly mammoth was roughly the same size as modern African elephants.
A Siberian specimen with a spearhead embedded in its shoulder blade shows that a spear had been thrown at it with great force.
At the time of discovery, its eyes and trunk were intact and some fur remained on its body.
Other characteristic features depicted in cave paintings include a large, high, single-domed head and a sloping back with a high shoulder hump; this shape resulted from the spinous processes of the back vertebrae decreasing in length from front to rear.
Since many remains of each species of mammoth are known from several localities, it is possible to reconstruct the evolutionary history of the genus through morphological studies.
Some cave paintings show woolly mammoths in structures interpreted as pitfall traps.
p. astensis'', ''M.
The word was first used in Europe during the early 17th century, when referring to ''maimanto'' tusks discovered in Siberia.
This is later than in modern elephants and may be due to a higher risk of predator attack or difficulty in obtaining food during the long periods of winter darkness in high latitudes.
In 2012, a juvenile was found in Siberia, which had man-made cut marks.
Evidence for such coexistence was not recognised until the 19th century.
More than 70  such dwellings are known, mainly from the Russian Plain.
Siberian mammoth ivory is reported to have been exported to Russia and Europe in the 10th century.
Examination of preserved calves show that they were all born during spring and summer, and since modern elephants have gestation periods of 21–22 months, it is probable that the mating season was from summer to autumn.
This is almost as large as extant male African elephants, which commonly reach , and is less than the size of the earlier mammoth species ''M.
The Columbian mammoth evolved from a population of ''M.
Some of its bones had been removed, and were found nearby.
Woolly mammoths survived an even greater loss of habitat at the end of the Saale glaciation 125,000 years ago, and it is likely that humans hunted the remaining populations to extinction at the end of the last glacial period.
Different woolly mammoth populations did not die out simultaneously across their range, but gradually became extinct over time.
This was one of the first attempts at reconstructing the skeleton of an extinct animal.
Differences were noted in genes for a number of aspects of physiology and biology that would be relevant to Arctic survival, including development of skin and hair, storage and metabolism of adipose tissue, and perceiving temperature.
Sloane was the first to recognise that the remains belonged to elephants.
Formally known as the Sopkarga mammoth, it was nicknamed "Zhenya" after the boy who found it.
The "Yukagir mammoth" had suffered from spondylitis in two vertebrae, and osteomyelitis is also known from some specimens.
Woolly mammoths may have used their tusks as shovels to clear snow from the ground and reach the vegetation buried below, and to break ice to drink.
jeffersonii'' may be a hybrid between the two species.
This is consistent with a previous observation that mice lacking active TRPV3 are likely to spend more time in cooler cage locations than wild type mice, and have wavier hair.
It has been claimed that the last woolly mammoth populations decreased in size and increased their sexual dimorphism, but this was dismissed in a 2012 study.
Woolly mammoths had very long tusks (modified incisor teeth), which were more curved than those of modern elephants.
This feature may have helped the mammoths to live in high latitudes.
As in Siberia, North American natives had "myths of observation" explaining the remains of woolly mammoths and other elephants; the Bering Strait Inupiat also believed the bones came from underground burrowing creatures, while other peoples associated them with primordial giants or "great beasts".
A less complete juvenile, nicknamed "Mascha", was found on the Yamal Peninsula in 1988.
In the 21st century, global warming has made access to Siberian tusks easier, since the permafrost thaws more quickly, exposing the mammoths embedded within it.
One of the heat-sensing genes encodes a protein, TRPV3, found in skin which also affects hair growth.
The glands are used especially by males to produce an oily substance with a strong smell called temporin.
The most common of these diseases was osteoarthritis, found in 2% of specimens.
Thomas Jefferson, who had a keen interest in palaeontology, is partially responsible for transforming the word ''mammoth'' from a noun describing the prehistoric elephant to an adjective describing anything of surprisingly large size.
Following Cuvier's identification, Johann Friedrich Blumenbach gave the woolly mammoth its scientific name, ''Elephas primigenius'', in 1799, placing it in the same genus as the Asian elephant.
One of its shoulder blades was broken, which may have happened when it fell into a crevasse.
This specimen weighed approximately  at death and was  high and  long.
The closest known relatives of the Proboscidea are the sirenians (dugongs and manatees) and the hyraxes (an order of small, herbivorous mammals).
In most cases, the flesh showed signs of decay before its freezing and later desiccation.
A 2006 study sequenced the Mc1r gene (which influences hair colour in mammals) from woolly mammoth bones.
The woolly mammoth chewed its food by using its powerful jaw muscles to move the mandible forwards and close the mouth, then backwards while opening; the sharp enamel ridges thereby cut across each other, grinding the food.
The first molars were about the size of those of a human, , the third were 15&nbsp;cm (6&nbsp;in)  long, and the sixth were about  long and weighed .
Unlike the trunk lobes of modern elephants, the upper "finger" at the tip of the trunk had a long pointed lobe and was  long, while the lower "thumb" was  and was broader.
Accumulations of modern elephant remains have been termed "elephants' graveyards", as these sites were erroneously thought to be where old elephants went to die.
Other adaptations to cold weather include ears that are far smaller than those of modern elephants; they were about  long and  across, and the ear of the 6–12 month old frozen calf "Dima" was under  long.
Its internal organs are similar to those of modern elephants, but its ears are only one-tenth the size of those of an African elephant of similar age.
Upon arrival at the location, Adams discovered that wild animals had eaten most of the organs and flesh of the mammoth, including the trunk.
p. hydruntinus'', ''M.
The woolly mammoth has remained culturally significant long after its extinction.
In the 19th century, several reports of "large shaggy beasts" were passed on to the Russian authorities by Siberian tribesmen, but no scientific proof ever surfaced.
This extinction formed part of the Quaternary extinction event, which began 40,000 years ago and peaked between 14,000 and 11,500 years ago.
Only its molars are known, which show that it had 8–10 enamel ridges.
By 1929, the remains of 34 mammoths with frozen soft tissues (skin, flesh, or organs) had been documented.
The first known members of the genus ''Mammuthus'' are the African species ''M.
Since 1860, Russian authorities have offered rewards of up to  for finds of frozen woolly mammoth carcasses.
Most intact mammoths have had little usable DNA because of their conditions of preservation.
Another possible origin is Estonian, where ''maa'' means earth, and ''mutt'' means mole.
Grasses, sedges, shrubs, and herbaceous plants were present, and scattered trees were mainly found in southern regions.
There does not seem to be a correlation between the number of mammoths depicted and the species that were most often hunted, since reindeer bones are the most frequently found animal remains at the site.
The teeth also sometimes had cancerous growths.
Individuals could probably reach the age of 60.
Rather than oval as the rest of the trunk, this part was ellipsoidal in cross section, and double the size in diameter.
Fossils of woolly mammoths and Columbian mammoths have been found together in a few localities of North America, including the Hot Springs sinkhole of South Dakota where their regions overlapped.
The woolly mammoth was well adapted to the cold environment during the last ice age.
It is likely that the woolly mammoth moulted seasonally, and that the heaviest fur was shed during spring.
Woolly mammoths were very important to ice-age humans, and human survival may have depended on the mammoth in some areas.
rumanus''; it spread across Europe and China.
This marked the first time that woolly mammoth genes had been functionally active since the species became extinct.
Approximately 1.4 million DNA nucleotide differences were found between mammoths and elephants, which affect the sequence of more than 1,600 proteins.
It was discovered at the Siberian Berezovka River, and the Russian authorities financed its excavation.
This suggests that the two populations interbred and produced fertile offspring.
The short and tall skulls of woolly and Columbian mammoths (''Mammuthus columbi'') are the culmination of this process.
The team mapped the woolly mammoth's nuclear genome sequence by extracting DNA from the hair follicles of both a 20,000-year-old mammoth retrieved from permafrost, and another that died 60,000 years ago.
In 1828, Joshua Brookes used the name ''Mammuthus borealis'' for woolly mammoth fossils in his collection that he put up for sale, thereby coining a new genus name.
A 2010 study suggests that the decline of the woolly mammoth could have increased temperatures by up to  at high latitudes in the northern hemisphere.
It consists of the head, trunk, and a foreleg, and is about 25,000 years old.
Mammoth ivory looks similar to elephant ivory, but the former is browner and the Schreger lines are coarser in texture.
Natural traps, such as kettle holes, sink holes, as well as mud, have also trapped mammoths in separate events over time.
A 2011 study showed that light individuals would have been rare.
Some ivory artefacts show that tusks had been straightened, and it is unknown how this was achieved.
Woolly mammoth ivory was used to create art objects.
In 2008, much of the woolly mammoth's chromosomal DNA was mapped.
The tail contained 21 vertebrae, whereas the tails of modern elephants contain 28–33.
The presence of undigested food in the stomach and seed pods still in the mouth of many of the specimens suggests neither starvation nor exposure are likely.
It also suggested that Eurasian ''M.
p. leith-adamsi'', ''M.
Mammoths born with at least one copy of the dominant allele would have had dark coats, while those with two copies of the recessive allele would have had light coats.
The largest collection of portable mammoth art, consisting of 62 depictions on 47 plaques, was found in the 1960s at an excavated open-air camp near Gönnersdorf in Germany.
Scientists identified milk in the stomach and faecal matter in the intestines of the mammoth calf "Lyuba".
This habitat was not dominated by ice and snow, as is popularly believed, since these regions are thought to have been high-pressure areas at the time.
The habitat of the woolly mammoth also supported other grazing herbivores such as the woolly rhinoceros, wild horses and bison.
A mammoth had six sets of molars throughout a lifetime, which were replaced five times, though a few specimens with a seventh set are known.
A small population of woolly mammoths survived on St. Paul Island, Alaska, well into the Holocene with the most recently published date of extinction being 5,600 years B.P.
Prior to this, Neanderthals had coexisted with mammoths during the Middle Palaeolithic, and these humans already utilised mammoth bones for tool making and building materials.
Today, more than five hundred depictions of woolly mammoths are known, in media ranging from cave paintings and engravings on the walls of 46 caves in Russia, France and Spain to engravings and sculptures (termed "portable art") made from ivory, antler, stone and bone.
The molars grew larger and contained more ridges with each replacement.
In 1738, Johann Philipp Breyne argued that mammoth fossils represented some kind of elephant.
The carcass contained well-preserved muscular tissue.
The very long hairs on the tail probably compensated for the shortness of the tail, enabling its use as a flyswatter, similar to the tail on modern elephants.
The family Elephantidae existed six million years ago in Africa and includes the modern elephants and the mammoths.
intermedius'', ''M.
The crowns of the teeth became deeper in height and the skulls became taller to accommodate this.
The juvenile specimen nicknamed "Yuka" is the first frozen mammoth with evidence of human interaction.
Woolly mammoth bones were used as construction material for dwellings by both Neanderthals and modern humans during the ice age.
The taxonomy of extinct elephants was complicated by the early 20th century, and in 1942, Henry Fairfield Osborn's posthumous monograph on the Proboscidea was published, wherein he used various taxon names that had previously been proposed for mammoth species, including replacing ''Mammuthus'' with ''Mammonteus'', as he believed the former name to be invalidly published.
The cell would then be stimulated into dividing, and inserted back into a female elephant.
Female tusks were smaller and thinner, averaging at  and weighing .
A depiction in the Cave of El Castillo may instead show ''Palaeoloxodon'', the "straight-tusked elephant".
primigenius'' and other mammoths have also been proposed, but their validity is uncertain; depending on author, they are either considered primitive forms of an advanced species or advanced forms of a primitive species.
Cloning would involve removal of the DNA-containing nucleus of the egg cell of a female elephant, and replacement with a nucleus from woolly mammoth tissue.
When Russia occupied Siberia, the ivory trade grew and it became a widely exported commodity, with huge amounts being excavated.
It is not known how much prehistoric humans relied on woolly mammoth meat, since there were many other large herbivores available.
The trunk of "Dima" was  long, whereas the trunk of the adult "Liakhov mammoth" was  long.
In 1796, French anatomist Georges Cuvier was the first to identify the woolly mammoth remains not as modern elephants transported to the Arctic, but as an entirely new species.
The latter condition could extend the lifespan of the individual, unless the tooth consisted of only a few plates.
Stories abound about frozen woolly mammoth meat that was consumed once defrosted, especially that of the "Berezovka mammoth", but most of these are considered dubious.
Its habitat was the mammoth steppe, which stretched across northern Eurasia and North America.
A newborn calf would have weighed about .
A 2008 genetic study showed that some of the woolly mammoths that entered North America through the Bering land bridge from Asia migrated back about 300,000 years ago and had replaced the previous Asian population by about 40,000 years ago, not long before the entire species became extinct.
africanavus'' from the Pleistocene.
p. jatzkovi'', ''M.
Between 1692 and 1806, only four descriptions of frozen mammoths were published in Europe.
