The French suffered another estimated 200,000 casualties and the Germans an estimated 500,000.
Similarly, the war strained the abilities of some formerly large and bureaucratised governments, such as in Austria-Hungary and Germany.
These advances had allowed the creation of strong defensive systems, which out-of-date military tactics could not break through for most of the war.
Thus, 50 billion gold marks (12.5 billion dollars) "represented the actual Allied assessment of German capacity to pay" and "therefore&nbsp;... represented the total German reparations" figure that had to be paid.
The UK government placed Ireland under martial law in response to the Easter Rising; although, once the immediate threat of revolution had dissipated, the authorities did try to make concessions to nationalist feeling.
The defenders displayed a marked collapse in morale, causing  Ludendorff to refer to this day as the "Black Day of the German army".
All nations pledged to follow the Hague Conventions on fair treatment of prisoners of war, and the survival rate for POWs was generally much higher than that of their peers at the front.
Between 5 and 10 million people died in the Russian famine of 1921.
It was one of the deadliest conflicts in history, and paved the way for major political changes, including revolutions in many of the nations involved.
The war drew in all the world's economic great powers, assembled in two opposing alliances: the Allies (based on the Triple Entente of the British Empire, France and the Russian Empire) versus the Central Powers of Germany and Austria-Hungary.
For example, the British had over 180,000 chemical weapons casualties during the war, and up to one-third of American casualties were caused by them.
At the siege of Maubeuge about 40,000 French soldiers surrendered, at the battle of Galicia Russians took about 100,000 to 120,000 Austrian captives, at the Brusilov Offensive about 325,000 to 417,000 Germans and Austrians surrendered to Russians, at the Battle of Tannenberg 92,000 Russians surrendered.
When Germany was united in 1871, Prussia became part of the new German nation.
For the United Kingdom and the British Empire, the state of war ceased under the provisions of the ''Termination of the Present War (Definition) Act 1918'' with respect to:
On the same day, the Armistice of Villa Giusti was signed.
How did the soldiers endure the horrors of trench warfare?
The Czechoslovak Legion fought with the Entente; their goal was to win support for the independence of Czechoslovakia.
In stark contrast to his predecessor, five days after his election he spoke of his determination to do what he could to bring peace.
The German colonial forces in German East Africa, led by Colonel Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck, fought a guerrilla warfare campaign during World War I and only surrendered two weeks after the armistice took effect in Europe.
While the Allied prisoners of the Central Powers were quickly sent home at the end of active hostilities, the same treatment was not granted to Central Power prisoners of the Allies and Russia, many of whom served as forced labor, e.g., in France until 1920.
The war increased female employment; however, the return of demobilised men displaced many from the workforce, as did the closure of many of the wartime factories.
The Austro-Hungarian government began negotiations to secure Italian neutrality, offering the French colony of Tunisia in return.
On 22 April 1915, at the Second Battle of Ypres, the Germans (violating the Hague Convention) used chlorine gas for the first time on the Western Front.
The German high command responded by despatching troops to hold the line, but these forces were far too weak to reestablish a front.
Kaiser Wilhelm II asked his cousin, Tsar Nicolas II, to suspend the Russian general mobilization.
The Germans also fielded Austrian  and  guns and, even at the beginning of the war, had inventories of various calibers of ''Minenwerfer'', which were ideally suited for trench warfare.
General Horace Smith-Dorrien was sent instead.
The ethnic cleansing of the Ottoman Empire's Armenian population, including mass deportations and executions, during the final years of the Ottoman Empire is considered genocide.
On 28 June 1914, Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand visited the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo.
However, because the weapon was to be directed against the enemy, none of us were overly concerned at all."
German casualties between March and April 1918 were 270,000, including many highly trained storm troopers.
The offensive's success was undermined by the reluctance of other generals to commit their forces to support the victory.
The last large-scale offensive of this period was a British attack (with French support) at Passchendaele (July–November 1917).
Benedict XV found his abilities and unique position as a religious emissary of peace ignored by the belligerent powers.
Conscription was common in most European countries.
Bulgaria was the first to sign an armistice, on 29 September 1918 at Saloniki.
A survivor said: "We were driven along like beasts; to drop out was to die."
It was not until the middle of September that the integrated force was ready for large-scale operations.
Italy had been allied with the German and Austro-Hungarian Empires since 1882 as part of the Triple Alliance.
In the late spring of 1918, three new states were formed in the South Caucasus: the First Republic of Armenia, the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic, and the Democratic Republic of Georgia, which declared their independence from the Russian Empire.
The Bulgarians suffered their only defeat of the war at the Battle of Dobro Pole.
The British were aided in Mesopotamia by local Arab and Assyrian tribesmen, while the Ottomans employed local Kurdish and Turcoman tribes.
Its reserves had been used up, even as US troops kept arriving at the rate of 10,000 per day.
Recognised for their value as observation platforms, balloons were important targets for enemy aircraft.
The final assault on the Hindenburg Line began with the Meuse-Argonne Offensive, launched by French and American troops on 26 September.
The British Royal Navy systematically hunted them down, though not without some embarrassment from its inability to protect Allied shipping.
The United States Senate did not ratify the treaty despite public support for it, and did not formally end its involvement in the war until the Knox–Porter Resolution was signed on 2 July 1921 by President Warren G. Harding.
In response, in February 1917, the German General Staff convinced Chancellor Theobald von Bethmann-Hollweg to declare unrestricted submarine warfare, with the goal of starving Britain out of the war.
Austria invaded and fought the Serbian army at the Battle of Cer and Battle of Kolubara beginning on 12 August.
Over the next two weeks, Austrian attacks were thrown back with heavy losses, which marked the first major Allied victories of the war and dashed Austro-Hungarian hopes of a swift victory.
To shoot down enemy planes, anti-aircraft guns and fighter aircraft were developed.
Strategically, while the Germans only mounted one major offensive, the Allies made several attempts to break through the German lines.
Irish nationalists and Marxists attempted to pursue Irish independence, culminating in the Easter Rising of 1916, with Germany sending 20,000 rifles to Ireland to stir unrest in Britain.
The Ottoman Empire was to be partitioned by the Treaty of Sèvres of 1920.
German planners estimated that unrestricted submarine warfare would cost Britain a monthly shipping loss of 600,000 tons.
General Foch was appointed as supreme commander of the Allied forces.
Once prisoners reached a camp, conditions were, in general, satisfactory (and much better than in World War II), thanks in part to the efforts of the International Red Cross and inspections by neutral nations.
This arrangement led to confusion and chaos both at the front and at home.
In the British Empire, the war unleashed new forms of nationalism.
The solution to the delays was an extensive program of building new freighters.
Diseases flourished in the chaotic wartime conditions.
In the Balkans, Yugoslav nationalists such as the leader, Ante Trumbić, strongly supported the war, desiring the freedom of Yugoslavs from Austria-Hungary and other foreign powers and the creation of an independent Yugoslavia.
The Allied powers led a small-scale invasion of Russia, partly to stop Germany from exploiting Russian resources, and to a lesser extent, to support the "Whites" (as opposed to the "Reds") in the Russian Civil War.
The Austro-Hungarian authorities encouraged the anti-Serb riots in Sarajevo, in which Croats and Bosniaks killed two ethnic Serbs and damaged numerous Serb-owned buildings.
Many Germans thought victory was near.
Were the generals to blame for the high casualty rates?
The Ottomans carried out organized and systematic massacres of the Armenian population at the beginning of the war and portrayed deliberately provoked acts of Armenian resistance as rebellions to justify further extermination.
It has been acknowledged that British generals were often capable men facing difficult challenges, and that it was under their command that the British army played a major part in the defeat of the Germans in 1918: a great forgotten victory.
Nonetheless, word of the impending assault reached sailors at Kiel.
The Austro-Hungarian provinces of Slovenia, Croatia and Bosnia provided troops for Austria-Hungary, in the fight with Serbia, Russia and Italy.
The strategy proved effective, cutting off vital military and civilian supplies, although this blockade violated accepted international law codified by several international agreements of the past two centuries.
:* Bulgaria on 9 August 1920.
In two days the British and Indian infantry, supported by a creeping barrage, broke the Ottoman front line and captured the headquarters of the Eighth Army (Ottoman Empire) at Tulkarm, the continuous trench lines at Tabsor, Arara and the Seventh Army (Ottoman Empire) headquarters at Nablus.
Much of the combat involved trench warfare, in which hundreds often died for each yard gained.
More heavily armed infantry then destroyed these isolated positions.
In 1918, the Austro-Hungarians failed to break through in a series of battles on the Piave and were finally decisively defeated in the Battle of Vittorio Veneto in October of that year.
Though many participants did not share in the experiences of combat or spend any significant time at the front, or had positive memories of their service, the images of suffering and trauma became the widely shared perception.
However, appeals to patriotism and duty, as well as mass arrests and trials, encouraged the soldiers to return to defend their trenches, although the French soldiers refused to participate in further offensive action.
Military tactics developed before World War I failed to keep pace with advances in technology and had become obsolete.
On 1 August, after the Russian response, Germany mobilized and declared war on Russia.
Under its terms, the Allied forces divested Constantinople on 23 August 1923.
Historian Samuel Hynes explained:
Fixed-wing aircraft were first used militarily by the Italians in Libya on 23 October 1911 during the Italo-Turkish War for reconnaissance, soon followed by the dropping of grenades and aerial photography the next year.
Communist and fascist movements around Europe drew strength from this theory and enjoyed a new level of popularity.
Before the end of the war, the Ottoman Empire had maintained a modest level of peace and stability throughout the Middle East.
Imperial Germany was dead; a new Germany had been born as the Weimar Republic.
Faced with Russia, Austria-Hungary could spare only one-third of its army to attack Serbia.
The disappearance of the Macedonian Front meant that the road to Budapest and Vienna was now opened to Allied forces.
Total Allied casualties on the Ottoman fronts amounted 650,000 men.
Former president Theodore Roosevelt denounced German acts as "piracy".
Of about 416,000 Australians who served, about 60,000 were killed and another 152,000 were wounded.
In the US, the Espionage Act of 1917 and Sedition Act of 1918 made it a federal crime to oppose military recruitment or make any statements deemed "disloyal".
German and Austro-Hungarian diplomats, however, scored a coup by persuading Bulgaria to join the attack on Serbia.
Germany lost 15.1% of its active male population, Austria-Hungary lost 17.1%, and France lost 10.5%.
Czechoslovakia, combining the Kingdom of Bohemia with parts of the Kingdom of Hungary, became a new nation.
Like a Fascist Italy, Nazi Germany sought to redirect the memory of the war to the benefit of its own policies.
At the time, parachutes were too heavy to be used by pilots of aircraft (with their marginal power output), and smaller versions were not developed until the end of the war; they were also opposed by the British leadership, who feared they might promote cowardice.
However, their effectiveness would grow as the war progressed; the Allies built tanks in large numbers, whilst the Germans employed only a few of their own design, supplemented by captured Allied tanks.
The reorganised Egyptian Expeditionary Force, with an additional mounted division, broke Ottoman forces at the Battle of Megiddo in September 1918.
The deaths of British merchant sailors and the seeming invulnerability of U-boats led to the development of depth charges (1916), hydrophones (passive sonar, 1917), blimps, hunter-killer submarines (HMS ''R-1'', 1917), forward-throwing anti-submarine weapons, and dipping hydrophones (the latter two both abandoned in 1918).
They have dynamically changed according to contemporary influences, reflecting in the 1950s perceptions of the war as "aimless" following the contrasting Second World War and emphasising conflict within the ranks during times of class conflict in the 1960s.
Meanwhile, Chaytor's Force of Australian light horse, New Zealand mounted rifles, Indian, British West Indies and Jewish infantry captured the crossings of the Jordan River, Es Salt, Amman and at Ziza most of the Fourth Army (Ottoman Empire).
Field Marshal Luigi Cadorna, a staunch proponent of the frontal assault, had dreams of breaking into the Slovenian plateau, taking Ljubljana and threatening Vienna.
Soon after the outbreak of hostilities, Britain began a naval blockade of Germany.
:* Hungary on 26 July 1921.
Following this victory, an Egyptian Expeditionary Force advanced across the Sinai Peninsula, pushing Ottoman forces back in the Battle of Magdhaba in December and the Battle of Rafa on the border between the Egyptian Sinai and Ottoman Palestine in January 1917.
While an exact number of deaths is unknown, the International Association of Genocide Scholars estimates 1.5 million.
Futile attempts using frontal assault came at a high price for both the British and the French and led to the widespread French Army Mutinies, after the failure of the costly Nivelle Offensive of April–May 1917.
The treaty ceded vast territories, including Finland, the Baltic provinces, parts of Poland and Ukraine to the Central Powers.
At the same time, industry needed to replace the lost labourers sent to war.
Further encouraged by the Allied invasion of Turkey in April 1915, Italy joined the Triple Entente and declared war on Austria-Hungary on 23 May.
This would march German armies through northern Belgium and into France, in an attempt to encircle the French army and then breach the 'second defensive area' of the fortresses of Verdun and Paris and the Marne river.
One of the most prominent and popular Italian nationalist supporters of the war was Gabriele d'Annunzio, who promoted Italian irredentism and helped sway the Italian public to support intervention in the war.
This figure could be paid in cash or in kind (coal, timber, chemical dyes, etc.).
In December 1914 the Ottoman Empire, with German support, invaded Persia (modern Iran) in an effort to cut off British and Russian access to petroleum reservoirs around Baku near the Caspian Sea.
Faced with these advances, on 2 September the German Supreme Army Command issued orders to withdraw to the Hindenburg Line in the south.
Russia became the Soviet Union and lost Finland, Estonia, Lithuania, and Latvia, which became independent countries.
The Russian Army reportedly suffered roughly 500,000 chemical weapon casualties in World War I.
Contested towns, villages, heights, and trenches in the screening positions and outposts of the Hindenburg Line continued to fall to the Allies, with the BEF alone taking 30,441&nbsp;prisoners in the last week of September.
The Armistice with Austria was signed in the Villa Giusti, near Padua, on 3 November.
Industrial output was half the 1913 levels.
In addition, a major influenza epidemic spread around the world.
Thus, both sides urgently sought a decisive victory.
In Russia, they were heavily involved in the Russian Civil War siding with the Whites against the Bolsheviks, at times controlling most of the Trans-Siberian railway and conquering all the major cities of Siberia.
In Russia, when the prisoners from the Czech Legion of the Austro-Hungarian army were released in 1917, they re-armed themselves and briefly became a military and diplomatic force during the Russian Civil War.
On 28 July, the Austro-Hungarians declared war on Serbia.
Germany attempted to use Indian nationalism and pan-Islamism to its advantage.
If Germany believed it would be many more months before American soldiers would arrive and that their arrival could be stopped by U-boats, it had miscalculated.
The Australian prime minister, Billy Hughes, wrote to the British prime minister, Lloyd George, "You have assured us that you cannot get better terms.
She tried instigating uprisings in India, and sent a mission to Afghanistan urging her to join the war on the side of Central powers.
While the Russian invasion failed, it caused the diversion of German troops to the east, allowing the Allied victory at the First Battle of the Marne.
The assassination led to a month of diplomatic manoeuvring between Austria-Hungary, Germany, Russia, France, and Britain called the July Crisis.
Accordingly, the ''Aufmarsch II West'' deployment was changed for the offensive of 1914, despite its unrealistic goals and the insufficient forces Germany had available for decisive success.
Initially the Germans were successful, particularly in the Battle of the Frontiers (14–24 August).
Mussolini's nationalism enabled him to raise funds from Ansaldo (an armaments firm) and other companies to create ''Il Popolo d'Italia'' to convince socialists and revolutionaries to support the war.
With the launch of  in 1906, the British Empire expanded on its significant advantage over its German rival.
Survivors reported that the U-boat surfaced and ran down the lifeboats, machine-gunning survivors in the water.
Poland reemerged as an independent country, after more than a century.
Of these, about 750,000 lost their lives.
Head of the British Army, Lord Kitchener, was to review the cadets, but the imminence of the war prevented him.
Austro-Hungarian leaders believed Germany would cover its northern flank against Russia.
Fakhri Pasha, the Ottoman commander of Medina, resisted for more than two and half years during the Siege of Medina before surrendering.
Active denial of war guilt in Germany and German resentment at both reparations and continued Allied occupation of the Rhineland made widespread revision of the meaning and memory of the war problematic.
In the east, Russia invaded with two armies.
At 11&nbsp;am on 11 November 1918—"the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the eleventh month"—a ceasefire came into effect.
However, the German army had fought its way into a good defensive position inside France and effectively halved France's supply of coal.
It was worded as such to lay a legal basis for reparations, and a similar clause was inserted in the treaties with Austria and Hungary.
As for the Nazis, they waved the banners of domestic treason and international conspiracy in an attempt to galvanize the German nation into a spirit of revenge.
In the Treaty of Versailles, this statement was Article 231.
On 29 October, the imperial authorities asked Italy for an armistice.
The Italians had numerical superiority but this advantage was lost, not only because of the difficult terrain in which the fighting took place, but also because of the strategies and tactics employed.
Gas was soon used by all major belligerents throughout the war.
The army became increasingly ineffective.
Furthermore, new research has revised our understanding of five major topics that historians have long debated.
These are: Why did the war begin?
However, they were then assigned to execute the retired deployment plan ''Aufmarsch I West'', also known as the Schlieffen Plan.
The establishment of the modern state of Israel and the roots of the continuing Israeli–Palestinian conflict are partially found in the unstable power dynamics of the Middle East that resulted from World War I.
However, throughout this period, British, French, and German tactics constantly evolved to meet new battlefield challenges.
Three heavy Krupp railway guns fired 183&nbsp;shells on the capital, causing many Parisians to flee.
When Bulgaria attacked Serbia and Greece on 16 June 1913, it lost most of Macedonia to Serbia and Greece and Southern Dobruja to Romania in the 33-day Second Balkan War, further destabilising the region.
Many of these graveyards also have central monuments to the missing or unidentified dead, such as the Menin Gate memorial and the Thiepval Memorial to the Missing of the Somme.
The British and French magnified the reports and disseminated them at home and in the United States, where they played a major role in dissolving support for Germany.
The United Kingdom intercepted the message and presented it to the US embassy in the UK.
Austro-Hungarian authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina imprisoned and extradited approximately 5,500 prominent Serbs, 700 to 2,200 of whom died in prison.
Total Ottoman casualties were 725,000 (325,000 dead and 400,000 wounded).
After this minor victory, the front remained static for over a year, despite several Italian offensives, centred on the Banjšice and Karst Plateau east of Gorizia.
However, in the Spring Offensive of 1918, Ludendorff used artillery only briefly and infiltrated small groups of infantry at weak points.
But despite its unsuitability, and the availability of more sensible and decisive options, it retained a certain allure due to its offensive nature and the pessimism of pre-war thinking, which expected offensive operations to be short-lived, costly in casualties, and unlikely to be decisive.
Prince Rupprecht warned Prince Max of Baden: "Our military situation has deteriorated so rapidly that I no longer believe we can hold out over the winter; it is even possible that a catastrophe will come earlier."
The Armistice of Mudros, signed at the end of October, ended hostilities with the Ottoman Empire when fighting was continuing north of Aleppo.
In 1914 alone, louse-borne epidemic typhus killed 200,000 in Serbia.
In Austria, for example, most pigs were slaughtered, so at war's end there was no meat.
Hindenburg and Ludendorff concluded that the strategic and operational balance had now shifted decidedly against the Central Powers and, a day after the Bulgarian collapse, insisted on an immediate peace settlement.
Discontent and the weaknesses of the Provisional Government led to a rise in the popularity of the Bolshevik Party, led by Lenin, which demanded an immediate end to the war.
Films such as ''All Quiet on the Western Front'', ''Paths of Glory'' and ''King & Country'' have perpetuated the idea, while war-time films including ''Camrades'', ''Poppies of Flanders'', and ''Shoulder Arms'' indicate that the most contemporary views of the war were overall far more positive.
However, he also repeatedly warned that the United States would not tolerate unrestricted submarine warfare, in violation of international law.
With the withdrawal of the Russian armies from the Caucasus front in the winter of 1917–18, the three major republics braced for an imminent Ottoman advance, which commenced in the early months of 1918.
The war is not now seen as a 'fight about nothing', but as a war of ideals, a struggle between aggressive militarism and more or less liberal democracy.
The Russian government collapsed in March 1917, and a revolution in November followed by a further military defeat brought the Russians to terms with the Central Powers via the Treaty of Brest Litovsk, which granted the Germans a significant victory.
The Germans continued to fight strong rear-guard actions and launched numerous counterattacks on lost positions, but only a few succeeded, and those only temporarily.
Mechanical reliability was an issue, but the experiment proved its worth.
Many of the deadliest battles in history occurred during World War I.
Britain still owed the United States $4.4 billion of World War I debt in 1934, and this money was never repaid.
The optimism of ''la belle époque'' was destroyed, and those who had fought in the war were referred to as the Lost Generation.
Even a man of peace such as Stresemann publicly rejected German guilt.
Just after the First Battle of the Marne (5–12 September 1914), Entente and German forces repeatedly attempted manoeuvring to the north in an effort to outflank each other: this series of manoeuvres became known as the "Race to the Sea".
By mid-November 1918, the Italian military occupied the entire former Austrian Littoral and had seized control of the portion of Dalmatia that had been guaranteed to Italy by the London Pact.
Artillery was responsible for the largest number of casualties and consumed vast quantities of explosives.
At the end of October, the Sinai and Palestine Campaign resumed, when General Edmund Allenby's XXth Corps, XXI Corps and Desert Mounted Corps won the Battle of Beersheba.
Following this, Austria broke off diplomatic relations with Serbia, and the next day ordered a partial mobilization.
By the end of the war or soon after, the German Empire, Russian Empire, Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Ottoman Empire ceased to exist.
All German survivors were summarily executed by ''Baralong'''s crew on the orders of Lieutenant Godfrey Herbert, the captain of the ship.
However, most of the German East-Asia squadron—consisting of the armoured cruisers  and , light cruisers  and  and two transport ships—did not have orders to raid shipping and was instead underway to Germany when it met British warships.
Historian Heather Jones argues that the historiography has been reinvigorated by the cultural turn in recent years.
World War I began as a clash of 20th-century technology and 19th-century tactics, with the inevitably large ensuing casualties.
Soon after, in October 1873, German Chancellor Otto von Bismarck negotiated the League of the Three Emperors (German: ''Dreikaiserbund'') between the monarchs of Austria-Hungary, Russia and Germany.
The British had a 6&nbsp;inch (152&nbsp;mm) howitzer, but it was so heavy it had to be hauled to the field in pieces and assembled.
The General Staff acknowledged that the policy would almost certainly bring the United States into the conflict, but calculated that British shipping losses would be so high that they would be forced to sue for peace after 5 to 6 months, before American intervention could make an impact.
Prince Maximilian of Baden took charge of a new government as Chancellor of Germany to negotiate with the Allies.
This has become the most common perception of World War I, perpetuated by the art, cinema, poems, and stories published subsequently.
