American and Soviet forces joined on Elbe river on 25 April.
On the night of 9–10 March, USAAF B-29 bombers struck Tokyo with thousands of incendiary bombs, which killed 100,000 civilians and destroyed 16 square miles within a few hours.
In Asia, the United States led the occupation of Japan and administrated Japan's former islands in the Western Pacific, while the Soviets annexed Sakhalin and the Kuril Islands.
He therefore decided to try to strengthen Germany's relations with the Soviets, or failing that, to attack and eliminate them as a factor.
Although Japanese forces were originally welcomed as liberators from European domination in some territories, their excessive brutality turned local public opinion against them within weeks.
In Europe, before the outbreak of the war, the Allies had significant advantages in both population and economics.
The use of the jet aircraft was pioneered and, though late introduction meant it had little impact, it led to jets becoming standard in air forces worldwide.
Most countries whose industries had been damaged moved towards economic recovery.
Poland's Enigma codebreakers were also evacuated to France.
The Japanese doctrine of Hokushin-ron, which emphasised Japan's expansion northward, was favoured by the Imperial Army during this time.
The second was the insertion of irregular forces behind Japanese front-lines in February which, by the end of April, had achieved mixed results.
In China, nationalist and communist forces resumed the civil war in June 1946.
In a state of "total war", the major participants threw their entire economic, industrial, and scientific capabilities behind the war effort, erasing the distinction between civilian and military resources.
Additionally, neither Germany nor Japan planned to fight a protracted war, and were not equipped to do so.
Germany launched an offensive against France and, adhering to the Manstein Plan also attacked the neutral nations of Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg on 10 May 1940.
These made World War&nbsp;II the deadliest conflict in human history.
The Nationalists won the civil war in April 1939; Franco, now dictator, bargained with both sides during the Second World War, but never concluded any major agreements.
The Battle of Britain began in early July with Luftwaffe attacks on shipping and harbours.
On 10 June, Italy invaded France, declaring war on both France and the United Kingdom.
The British were driven from the Balkans after Germany conquered the Greek island of Crete by the end of May.
The largest portion of military dead were 5.7 million ethnic Russians, followed by 1.3 million ethnic Ukrainians.
During 1944 and 1945 the Japanese suffered major reverses in mainland Asia in South Central China and Burma, while the Allies crippled the Japanese Navy and captured key Western Pacific islands.
From November 1943, during the seven-week Battle of Changde, the Chinese forced Japan to fight a costly war of attrition, while awaiting Allied relief.
In May 1945, Australian troops landed in Borneo, over-running the oilfields there.
The situation was aggravated in early 1935 when the Territory of the Saar Basin was legally reunited with Germany and Hitler repudiated the Treaty of Versailles, accelerated his rearmament programme, and introduced conscription.
In December 1940 he accused Hitler of planning world conquest and ruled out negotiations as useless, calling for the US to become an "arsenal for democracy" and promoted the passage of Lend-Lease aid to support the British war effort.
German operations in the Atlantic also suffered.
Under the treaty, Germany lost around 13 per cent of its home territory and all of its overseas possessions, while German annexation of other states was prohibited, reparations were imposed, and limits were placed on the size and capability of the country's armed forces.
Thus ended the war in Asia, cementing the total victory of the Allies.
The United States, United Kingdom and other Western governments reacted to this move with a freeze on Japanese assets and a total oil embargo.
Since early 1941 the United States and Japan had been engaged in negotiations in an attempt to improve their strained relations and end the war in China.
On the Continent, raids of Allied commandos on strategic targets, culminating in the disastrous Dieppe Raid, demonstrated the Western Allies' inability to launch an invasion of continental Europe without much better preparation, equipment, and operational security.
By the 1950s, every fifth West German was a refugee from the east.
A treaty regarding Germany's future allowed the reunification of East and West Germany to take place in 1990 and resolved other post-World War II issues.
The five permanent members remain so to the present, although there have been two seat changes, between the Republic of China and the People's Republic of China in 1971, and between the Soviet Union and its successor state, the Russian Federation, following the dissolution of the Soviet Union.
The US Library of Congress estimates that in Java, between 4 and 10 million ''rōmusha'' (Japanese: "manual labourers"), were forced to work by the Japanese military.
On 4 July 1943, Germany attacked Soviet forces around the Kursk Bulge.
It involved the vast majority of the world's nations—including all of the great powers—eventually forming two opposing military alliances: the Allies and the Axis.
The British focused development on anti-submarine weaponry and tactics, such as sonar and convoys, while Germany focused on improving its offensive capability, with designs such as the Type VII submarine and wolfpack tactics.
On 29 August, Hitler demanded that a Polish plenipotentiary immediately travel to Berlin to negotiate the handover of Danzig, and to allow a plebiscite in the Polish Corridor in which the German minority would vote on secession.
During Japan's initial conquest it captured  of oil (~5.5×105 tonnes) left behind by retreating Allied forces, and by 1943 was able to get production in the Dutch East Indies up to , 76 per cent of its 1940 output rate.
Submarines, which had proved to be an effective weapon during the First World War, were anticipated by all sides to be important in the second.
Anti-aircraft weaponry also advanced, including defences such as radar and surface-to-air artillery, such as the German 88 mm gun.
The Germans soon intervened to assist Italy.
Concerns the Japanese might use bases in Vichy-held Madagascar caused the British to invade the island in early May 1942.
Over the next five months, the USAAF firebombed a total of 67 Japanese cities, killing 393,000 civilians and destroying 65% of built up areas.
He did send volunteers to fight on the Eastern Front under German command but Spain remained neutral and did not allow either side to use its territory.
The two nations then fought several battles, in Shanghai, Rehe and Hebei, until the Tanggu Truce was signed in 1933.
In 1939 the United States had renounced its trade treaty with Japan; and, beginning with an aviation gasoline ban in July 1940, Japan became subject to increasing economic pressure.
In June 1941, the European Axis powers launched an invasion of the Soviet Union, opening the largest land theatre of war in history, which trapped the major part of the Axis' military forces into a war of attrition.
Over 30,000 foreign volunteers, known as the International Brigades, also fought against the Nationalists.
The French, who committed to attack Germany in the west, had no intention of doing so."
The French-fortified Maginot Line and the main body the Allied forces which had moved into Belgium were circumvented by a flanking movement through the thickly wooded Ardennes region, mistakenly perceived by Allied planners as an impenetrable natural barrier against armoured vehicles.
The second Japanese invasion of China aimed to destroy China's main fighting forces, secure railways between Japanese-held territory and capture Allied airfields.
In late October, American forces invaded the Filipino island of Leyte; soon after, Allied naval forces scored another large victory in the Battle of Leyte Gulf, one of the largest naval battles in history.
Exploiting poor American naval command decisions, the German navy ravaged Allied shipping off the American Atlantic coast.
By early December, freshly mobilised reserves allowed the Soviets to achieve numerical parity with Axis troops.
The Germans split Army Group South into two groups: Army Group A advanced to the lower Don River and struck south-east to the Caucasus, while Army Group B headed towards the Volga River.
The Americans planned a counter-attack against Japanese positions in the southern Solomon Islands, primarily Guadalcanal, as a first step towards capturing Rabaul, the main Japanese base in Southeast Asia.
The US emerged much richer than any other nation; it had a baby boom and by 1950 its gross domestic product per person was much higher than that of any of the other powers and it dominated the world economy.
Japan withdrew from the League of Nations after being condemned for its incursion into Manchuria.
By late March 1941, following Bulgaria's signing of the Tripartite Pact, the Germans were in position to intervene in Greece.
In December 1941, Japan attacked the United States and European territories in the Pacific Ocean, and quickly conquered much of the Western Pacific.
A month later, Germany and Japan signed the Anti-Comintern Pact, which Italy would join in the following year.
By January, the offensive had been repulsed with no strategic objectives fulfilled.
In the Pacific theatre, American forces accompanied by the forces of the Philippine Commonwealth advanced in the Philippines, clearing Leyte by the end of April 1945.
The Red Army also captured Sakhalin Island and the Kuril Islands.
This idea was challenged by the poor performance of the relatively light early tank guns against armour, and German doctrine of avoiding tank-versus-tank combat.
An estimated 11 to 17 million civilians died either as a direct or as an indirect result of Nazi ideological policies, including the systematic genocide of around 6 million Jews during the Holocaust, along with a further 5 to 6 million ethnic Poles and other Slavs (including Ukrainians and Belarusians)—Roma, homosexuals, and other ethnic and minority groups.
The Axis expanded in November 1940 when Hungary, Slovakia and Romania joined the Tripartite Pact.
The Kiev offensive was overwhelmingly successful, resulting in encirclement and elimination of four Soviet armies, and made further advance into Crimea and industrially developed Eastern Ukraine (the First Battle of Kharkov) possible.
During the summer, the Axis made significant gains into Soviet territory, inflicting immense losses in both personnel and materiel.
The war resulted in the military occupation of Ethiopia and its annexation into the newly created colony of Italian East Africa (''Africa Orientale Italiana'', or AOI); in addition, it exposed the weakness of the League of Nations as a force to preserve peace.
Although all of Germany's stated demands had been satisfied by the agreement, privately Hitler was furious that British interference had prevented him from seizing all of Czechoslovakia in one operation.
On 3 September 1943, the Western Allies invaded the Italian mainland, following Italy's armistice with the Allies.
In January 1941 secret high level staff talks with the British began for the purposes of determining how to defeat Germany should the US enter the war.
In September, Japan attempted to take the city of Changsha again and clashed with Chinese nationalist forces.
In June 1940, the Soviet Union forcibly annexed Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, and the disputed Romanian regions of Bessarabia, Northern Bukovina and Hertza.
The Netherlands and Belgium were overrun using blitzkrieg tactics in a few days and weeks, respectively.
The British and Americans agreed to continue to press the initiative in the Mediterranean by invading Sicily to fully secure the Mediterranean supply routes.
These landings were successful, and led to the defeat of the German Army units in France.
Meanwhile, Nazi-Soviet political rapprochement and economic co-operation gradually stalled, and both states began preparations for war.
Even with large-scale mechanisation, infantry remained the backbone of all forces, and throughout the war, most infantry were equipped similarly to World War&nbsp;I.
This, as well as intelligence data which established that a minimal number of Soviet troops in the East would be sufficient to deter any attack by the Japanese Kwantung Army, allowed the Soviets to begin a massive counter-offensive that started on 5 December all along the front and pushed German troops  west.
They confirmed earlier agreements about Germany, and reiterated the demand for unconditional surrender of all Japanese forces by Japan, specifically stating that "the alternative for Japan is prompt and utter destruction".
It was at this time that political scientists began to predict that a second Great War might take place.
Italy began operations in the Mediterranean, initiating a siege of Malta in June, conquering British Somaliland in August, and making an incursion into British-held Egypt in September 1940.
The United Kingdom responded to Greek requests for assistance by sending troops to Crete and providing air support to Greece.
In Western, Northern and Central Europe (France, Norway, Denmark, the Low Countries, and the annexed portions of Czechoslovakia) Germany established economic policies through which it collected roughly 69.5 billion reichmarks (27.8 billion US Dollars) by the end of the war, this figure does not include the sizeable plunder of industrial products, military equipment, raw materials and other goods.
The mass-bombing of civilian areas, notably the cities of Warsaw, Rotterdam and London; including the aerial targeting of hospitals and fleeing refugees by the German Luftwaffe, along with the bombing of Tokyo, and German cities of Dresden, Hamburg and Cologne by the Western Allies may be considered as war crimes.
As a result, the bulk of the Allied armies found themselves trapped in an encirclement and were beaten.
In August, the United Kingdom and the United States jointly issued the Atlantic Charter.
In the Pacific, US forces continued to press back the Japanese perimeter.
Too weak to resist Japan, China appealed to the League of Nations for help.
In March 1939, Germany invaded the remainder of Czechoslovakia and subsequently split it into the German Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia and a pro-German client state, the Slovak Republic.
Hitler's objectives were to eliminate the Soviet Union as a military power, exterminate Communism, generate ''Lebensraum'' ("living space") by dispossessing the native population and guarantee access to the strategic resources needed to defeat Germany's remaining rivals.
It was generally accepted at the time that the war ended with the armistice of 14 August 1945 (V-J Day), rather than the formal surrender of Japan (2 September 1945).
Political integration, especially in Europe, emerged as an effort to end pre-war enmities and to create a common identity.
After that, the Western Allies slowly pushed into Germany, but failed to cross the Rur river in a large offensive.
However, no positive or specific customary international humanitarian law with respect to aerial warfare existed before or during World War&nbsp;II.
In April 1940, Germany invaded Denmark and Norway to protect shipments of iron ore from Sweden, which the Allies were attempting to cut off by unilaterally mining neutral Norwegian waters.
Post-war division of the world was formalised by two international military alliances, the United States-led NATO and the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact; the long period of political tensions and military competition between them, the Cold War, would be accompanied by an unprecedented arms race and proxy wars.
From 1922 to 1925, the Fascist movement led by Benito Mussolini seized power in Italy with a nationalist, totalitarian, and class collaborationist agenda that abolished representative democracy, repressed socialist, left-wing and liberal forces, and pursued an aggressive expansionist foreign policy aimed at making Italy a world power, promising the creation of a "New Roman Empire".
In September, the United States further agreed to a trade of American destroyers for British bases.
The Allies did have some successes during this time.
The Allies established occupation administrations in Austria and Germany.
The alliance between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union had begun to deteriorate even before the war was over.
In March 1938, Nationalist Chinese forces won their first major victory at Taierzhuang but then the city of Xuzhou was taken by Japanese in May.
On 17 September 1939, after signing a cease-fire with Japan, the Soviets invaded Poland from the east.
Italy also experienced an economic boom and the French economy rebounded.
Development of SIGINT (''sig''nals ''int''elligence) and cryptanalysis enabled the countering process of decryption.
To increase pressure on China by blocking supply routes, and to better position Japanese forces in the event of a war with the Western powers, Japan invaded and occupied northern Indochina.
In Italy, the Western Allies remained stalemated at the German defensive line.
In November 1943, Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston Churchill met with Chiang Kai-shek in Cairo and then with Joseph Stalin in Tehran.
The Commonwealth attempted to dislodge Axis forces in May and again in June, but failed on both occasions.
China returned to its pre-war industrial production by 1952.
Others follow the British historian A. J. P. Taylor, who held that the Sino-Japanese War and war in Europe and its colonies occurred simultaneously and the two wars merged in 1941.
World War&nbsp;II altered the political alignment and social structure of the world.
The Axis advance halted in 1942 when Japan lost the critical Battle of Midway, near Hawaii, and Germany was defeated in North Africa and then, decisively, at Stalingrad in the Soviet Union.
Despite several offensives by both sides, the war between China and Japan was stalemated by 1940.
Italy, as an Entente ally, had made some post-war territorial gains; however, Italian nationalists were angered that the promises made by Britain and France to secure Italian entrance into the war were not fulfilled with the peace settlement.
Germany responded by disarming Italian forces, seizing military control of Italian areas, and creating a series of defensive lines.
About 100,000 Polish military personnel were evacuated to Romania and the Baltic countries; many of these soldiers later fought against the Germans in other theatres of the war.
However, initially the alliance provided limited direct military support to Poland, consisting of a cautious, half-hearted French probe into the Saarland., observes that, while it is true that Poland was far away, making it difficult for the French and British to provide support, "few Western historians of World War II&nbsp;... know that the British had committed to bomb Germany if it attacked Poland, but did not do so except for one raid on the base of Wilhelmshafen.
In August 1939, Germany and the Soviet Union signed the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, a non-aggression treaty with a secret protocol.
Both Germany and the USSR used this proxy war as an opportunity to test in combat their most advanced weapons and tactics.
Among the eastern territories, Silesia, Neumark and most of Pomerania were taken over by Poland, East Prussia was divided between Poland and the USSR, followed by the expulsion of the 9 million Germans from these provinces, as well as the expulsion of 3 million Germans from the Sudetenland in Czechoslovakia to Germany.
The Western Allies also began a naval blockade of Germany, which aimed to damage the country's economy and war effort.
Barron's Educational Series.
The offensive in North Africa was highly successful and by early February 1941 Italy had lost control of eastern Libya and large numbers of Italian troops had been taken prisoner.
General Yasuji Okamura implemented the policy in Heipei and Shantung.
The Soviet advance prompted resistance forces in Poland to initiate several uprisings against the German occupation.
Recovery began with the mid-1948 currency reform in Western Germany, and was sped up by the liberalisation of European economic policy that the Marshall Plan (1948–1951) both directly and indirectly caused.
The Second Italo–Abyssinian War was a brief colonial war that began in October 1935 and ended in May 1936.
While 37,583 prisoners from the UK, 28,500 from the Netherlands, and 14,473 from the United States were released after the surrender of Japan, the number of Chinese released was only 56.
The first, an offensive into the Arakan region in late 1942, went disastrously, forcing a retreat back to India by May 1943.
After signing the German–Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Demarcation, the Soviet Union forced the Baltic countries—Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania—to allow it to station Soviet troops in their countries under pacts of "mutual assistance".
It also raised the question of continuing Polish independence.
Continued antipathy between Chinese communist and nationalist forces culminated in armed clashes in January 1941, effectively ending their co-operation.
Meanwhile, the United States Army Air Forces (USAAF) were destroying strategic and populated cities and towns in Japan in an effort to destroy Japanese war industry and civilian morale.
About 270,000 of these Javanese labourers were sent to other Japanese-held areas in South East Asia, and only 52,000 were repatriated to Java.
In December 1940, British Commonwealth forces began counter-offensives against Italian forces in Egypt and Italian East Africa.
In early June, Japan put its operations into action but the Americans, having broken Japanese naval codes in late May, were fully aware of the plans and force dispositions and used this knowledge to achieve a decisive victory at Midway over the Imperial Japanese Navy.
In November 1939, the American Neutrality Act was amended to allow "cash and carry" purchases by the Allies.
The ''blitzkrieg'' phase of the war in Europe had ended.
Mitsuyoshi Himeta reported that 2.7 million casualties occurred during the ''Sankō Sakusen''.
By late May 1944, the Soviets had liberated Crimea, largely expelled Axis forces from Ukraine, and made incursions into Romania, which were repulsed by the Axis troops.
That meant Japan was essentially forced to choose between abandoning its ambitions in China, or seizing the natural resources it needed in the Dutch East Indies by force;, listing various military and diplomatic developments, observes that "the threat to Japan was not purely economic."
In February, the Soviets entered Silesia and Pomerania, while Western Allies entered western Germany and closed to the Rhine river.
In Italy, Allied advance also slowed due to the last major German defensive line.
The Soviets decided to make their stand at Stalingrad on the Volga.
Chinese forces started to counterattack in Battle of West Hunan that occurred between 6 April and 7 June 1945.
Paris fell to the Germans on 14 June and eight days later France signed an armistice with Germany and was soon divided into German and Italian occupation zones, and an unoccupied rump state under the Vichy Regime, which, though officially neutral, was generally aligned with Germany.
Before taking effect though, the Franco-Soviet pact was required to go through the bureaucracy of the League of Nations, which rendered it essentially toothless.
He encountered little opposition from other European powers.
The tank, which had been used predominantly for infantry support in the First World War, had evolved into the primary weapon.
In May 1943, Canadian and U.S. forces were sent to eliminate Japanese forces from the Aleutians.
Two days later, Hitler committed suicide, and was succeeded by Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz.
It was the most widespread war in history, and directly involved more than 100 million people from over 30 countries.
During this conference, the United Kingdom held its general election, and Clement Attlee replaced Churchill as Prime Minister.
The primary targets of this surprise offensive were the Baltic region, Moscow and Ukraine, with the ultimate goal of ending the 1941 campaign near the Arkhangelsk-Astrakhan line, from the Caspian to the White Seas.
This attack was followed up shortly after by Anglo-American landings in French North Africa, which resulted in the region joining the Allies.
Although the British argued for further operations in the Balkans to bring Turkey into the war, in May 1943, the Americans extracted a British commitment to limit Allied operations in the Mediterranean to an invasion of the Italian mainland and to invade France in 1944.
Several changes in leadership occurred during this period.
The portable machine gun spread, a notable example being the German MG34, and various submachine guns which were suited to close combat in urban and jungle settings.
That same day British forces landed in Iceland and the Faroes to preempt a possible German invasion of the islands.
Although aeronautical warfare had relatively little success at the start of the war, actions at Taranto, Pearl Harbor, and the Coral Sea established the carrier as the dominant capital ship in place of the battleship.
Despite considerable losses, in early 1942 Germany and its allies stopped a major Soviet offensive in central and southern Russia, keeping most territorial gains they had achieved during the previous year.
Of the total number of deaths in World War&nbsp;II, approximately 85 per cent—mostly Soviet and Chinese—were on the Allied side and 15 per cent were on the Axis side.
Although the Red Army was preparing for strategic counter-offensives before the war, ''Barbarossa'' forced the Soviet supreme command to adopt a strategic defence.
In North Africa, the Germans launched an offensive in January, pushing the British back to positions at the Gazala Line by early February, followed by a temporary lull in combat which Germany used to prepare for their upcoming offensives.
Denmark capitulated after a few hours, and despite Allied support, during which the important harbour of Narvik temporarily was recaptured from the Germans, Norway was conquered within two months.
In August 1942, the Allies succeeded in repelling a second attack against El Alamein and, at a high cost, managed to deliver desperately needed supplies to the besieged Malta.
Shortly after the Franco-British pledge to Poland, Germany and Italy formalised their own alliance with the Pact of Steel.
On 11 July, Allied leaders met in Potsdam, Germany.
After the Guadalcanal Campaign, the Allies initiated several operations against Japan in the Pacific.
In the Atlantic, escort carriers proved to be a vital part of Allied convoys, increasing the effective protection radius and helping to close the Mid-Atlantic gap.
p. 236 ISBN 0-7641-1973-7.There is also the viewpoint that both World War&nbsp;I and World War&nbsp;II are part of the same "European Civil War" or "Second Thirty Years War": ; .
Germany sustained 5.3 million military losses, mostly on the Eastern Front and during the final battles in Germany.
In Asia at the same time, China had roughly six times the population of Japan, but only an 89 per cent higher GDP; this is reduced to three times the population and only a 38 per cent higher GDP if Japanese colonies are included.
The period featured massacres with victims in the hundreds at Civitella (; ), Fosse Ardeatine (), and Sant'Anna di Stazzema (), and is capped with the Marzabotto massacre.
A denazification programme in Germany led to the prosecution of Nazi war criminals and the removal of ex-Nazis from power, although this policy moved towards amnesty and re-integration of ex-Nazis into West German society.
Eventually, the British persuaded the Americans that a landing in France was infeasible in 1942 and they should instead focus on driving the Axis out of North Africa.
Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek deployed his best army to defend Shanghai, but, after three months of fighting, Shanghai fell.
On 18 December 1940, Hitler issued the directive to prepare for an invasion of the Soviet Union.
In May 1944, British forces mounted a counter-offensive that drove Japanese troops back to Burma, and Chinese forces that had invaded northern Burma in late 1943 besieged Japanese troops in Myitkyina.
At the start of the war, most commanders thought enemy tanks should be met by tanks with superior specifications.
Hoping to contain Germany, the United Kingdom, France and Italy formed the Stresa Front; however, in June 1935, the United Kingdom made an independent naval agreement with Germany, easing prior restrictions.
Japan's next plan, motivated by the earlier Doolittle Raid, was to seize Midway Atoll and lure American carriers into battle to be eliminated; as a diversion, Japan would also send forces to occupy the Aleutian Islands in Alaska.
With the situation in Europe and Asia relatively stable, Germany, Japan, and the Soviet Union made preparations.
On 1 September 1939, Germany invaded Poland under the false pretext that the Poles had carried out a series of sabotage operations against German targets near the border.
The former conference determined the post-war return of Japanese territory and the military planning for Burma Campaign , while the latter included agreement that the Western Allies would invade Europe in 1944 and that the Soviet Union would declare war on Japan within three months of Germany's defeat.
Perhaps most importantly, during the Battle of Britain the Royal Air Force had successfully resisted the Luftwaffe's assault, and the German bombing campaign largely ended in May 1941.
In addition to Nazi concentration camps, the Soviet gulags (labour camps) led to the death of citizens of occupied countries such as Poland, Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia, as well as German prisoners of war (POWs) and even Soviet citizens who had been or were thought to be supporters of the Nazis.
The victorious great powers—the United States, the Soviet Union, China, the United Kingdom, and France—became the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council.
Thus, the income from occupied nations was over 40 per cent of the income Germany collected from taxation, a figure which increased to nearly 40 per cent of total German income as the war went on.
On 6 April Germany simultaneously invaded both Yugoslavia and Greece, making rapid progress and forcing both nations to surrender within the month.
The majority were taken prisoner, whilst over 300,000, mostly British and French, were evacuated from the continent at Dunkirk by early June, although abandoning almost all of their equipment.
The Soviet Union, despite enormous human and material losses, also experienced rapid increase in production in the immediate post-war era.
After 1942, the number reached 10 million.
