More than 40 unstable xenon isotopes undergo radioactive decay, and the isotope ratios of xenon are an important tool for studying the early history of the Solar System.
From his results, he deduced that xenon gas could serve as an anesthetic.
Electron-withdrawing groups, such as groups with fluorine substitution, are necessary to stabilize these compounds.
In addition, effects of xenon on erythropoietin production in humans have not been demonstrated, so far.
He inferred that this was a decay product of radioactive iodine-129.
These observations are not without caveat, however, because the xenon atom has an electronic influence on the reactivity of the fullerene.
The individual cells in a plasma display contain a mixture of xenon and neon ionized with electrodes.
Xenon does not react with oxygen directly; the trioxide is formed by the hydrolysis of :
Elements more massive than iron-56 consume energy through fusion, and the synthesis of xenon represents no energy gain for a star.
129Xe is produced by beta decay of 129I, which has a half-life of 16&nbsp;million years.
also forms coordination complexes with transition metal ions.
A number of xenon oxyfluorides are known, including , , , and .
He tested the effects of varying the breathing mixtures on his subjects, and discovered that this caused the divers to perceive a change in depth.
Chemically, the perxenate compounds are used as oxidizing agents in analytical chemistry.
The anticancer drug 5-fluorouracil can be produced by reacting xenon difluoride with uracil.
The iodine-xenon method of dating gives the time elapsed between nucleosynthesis and the condensation of a solid object from the solar nebula.
Worldwide production of xenon in 1998 was estimated at 5,000–7,000&nbsp;m3.
The xenon chloride excimer laser has certain dermatological uses.
is formed by reacting  with xenon gas at low temperatures.
However, while teaching at the University of British Columbia, Neil Bartlett discovered that the gas platinum hexafluoride (PtF6) was a powerful oxidizing agent that could oxidize oxygen gas (O2) to form dioxygenyl hexafluoroplatinate (O2+PtF6−).
Xenon chloride and xenon fluoride have also been used in excimer (or, more accurately, exciplex) lasers.
It was later employed as a propellant for JPL's Deep Space 1 probe, Europe's SMART-1 spacecraft and for the three ion propulsion engines on NASA's Dawn Spacecraft.
This makes the surface signals strong enough to measure and distinguish from bulk signals.
Like helium, xenon does not satisfy the body's need for oxygen, and it is both a simple asphyxiant and an anesthetic more powerful than nitrous oxide; consequently, and because xenon is expensive, many universities have prohibited the voice stunt as a general chemistry demonstration.
Xenon is a competitive inhibitor of the serotonin 5-HT3 receptor.
It is a colorless, dense, odorless noble gas found in the Earth's atmosphere in trace amounts.
Xenon is non-toxic, although it does dissolve in blood and belongs to a select group of substances that penetrate the blood–brain barrier, causing mild to full surgical anesthesia when inhaled in high concentrations with oxygen.
Reportedly, doping with xenon inhalation has been used in Russia since 2004 and perhaps earlier.
Xenon at 80% concentration along with 20% oxygen rapidly produces the unconsciousness of general anesthesia (and has been used for this, as discussed above).
Xenon is a member of the zero-valence elements that are called noble or inert gases.
Nuclei of two of the stable isotopes of xenon, 129Xe and 131Xe, have non-zero intrinsic angular momenta (nuclear spins, suitable for nuclear magnetic resonance).
Through the sensitive chemical shift of the xenon atom to its environment, chemical reactions on the fullerene molecule can be analyzed.
In 1960, physicist John H. Reynolds discovered that certain meteorites contained an isotopic anomaly in the form of an overabundance of xenon-129.
In 2008, Khriachtchev ''et al.''
Barium perxenate, when treated with concentrated sulfuric acid, yields gaseous xenon tetroxide:
However,  may be merely a van der Waals molecule of weakly bound Xe atoms and  molecules and not a real compound.
As a liquid, xenon has a density of up to 3.100&nbsp;g/mL, with the density maximum occurring at the triple point.
However, it readily dissolves in most plastics and rubber, and will gradually escape from a container sealed with such materials.
Like nitrous oxide and cyclopropane, xenon activates the two-pore domain potassium channel TREK-1.
Xenon is also used in protein crystallography.
Its crystal structure may allow it to replace silicon in silicate minerals.
reacts with CsF to form the  anion, while XeOF3 reacts with the alkali metal fluorides KF, RbF and CsF to form the  anion.
The xenon fluorides behave as both fluoride acceptors and fluoride donors, forming salts that contain such cations as  and , and anions such as , , and .
Ramsay suggested the name ''xenon'' for this gas from the Greek word ''ξένον'' xenon, neuter singular form of ''ξένος'' xenos, meaning 'foreign(er)', 'strange(r)', or 'guest'.
Using gigapascals of pressure, xenon has been forced into a metallic phase.
Xenon gas was added to the ventilation mix for a newborn baby at St. Michael's Hospital, Bristol, England, whose life chances were otherwise grim, and was successful, leading to the authorisation of clinical trials for similar cases.
Numerous such compounds have been characterized, including:
In a similar way, xenon isotopic ratios such as 129Xe/130Xe and 136Xe/130Xe are a powerful tool for understanding planetary differentiation and early outgassing.
They found xenon in the residue left over from evaporating components of liquid air.
Because a 129Xe nucleus has a spin of 1/2, and therefore a zero electric quadrupole moment, the 129Xe nucleus does not experience any quadrupolar interactions during collisions with other atoms, and the hyperpolarization persists for long periods even after the engendering light and vapor have been removed.
135Xe is of considerable significance in the operation of nuclear fission reactors.
Xenone is inert, environmentally friendly, and less corrosive to an ion engine than other fuels such as mercury or caesium.
Xenon is obtained commercially as a by-product of the separation of air into oxygen and nitrogen.
In 1995, M. Räsänen and co-workers, scientists at the University of Helsinki in Finland, announced the preparation of xenon dihydride (HXeH), and later xenon hydride-hydroxide (HXeOH), hydroxenoacetylene (HXeCCH), and other Xe-containing molecules.
The interaction of this plasma with the electrodes generates ultraviolet photons, which then excite the phosphor coating on the front of the display.
An unusual ion containing xenon is the tetraxenonogold(II) cation, , which contains Xe–Au bonds.
Recently, there has been an interest in xenon compounds where xenon is directly bonded to a less electronegative element than fluorine or oxygen, particularly carbon.
This supernova source may also have caused collapse of the solar gas cloud.
After Neil Bartlett's discovery in 1962 that xenon can form chemical compounds, a large number of xenon compounds have been discovered and described.
The problem of the low terrestrial xenon may be explained by covalent bonding of xenon to oxygen within quartz, reducing the outgassing of xenon into the atmosphere.
Since then, many other xenon compounds have been discovered, in addition to some compounds of the noble gases argon, krypton, and radon, including argon fluorohydride (HArF), krypton difluoride (KrF2), and radon fluoride.
The xenon atom trapped in the fullerene can be observed by 129Xe nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy.
Such non-equilibrium alignment of spins is a temporary condition, and is called ''hyperpolarization''.
In nuclear energy studies, xenon is used in bubble chambers, probes, and in other areas where a high molecular weight and inert chemistry is desirable.
This entity is formed because the xenon atom tends to complete the outermost electronic shell by adding an electron from a neighboring xenon atom.
Xenon difluoride is used as an etchant for silicon, particularly in the production of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS).
Xenon mimics neuronal ischemic preconditioning by activating ATP sensitive potassium channels.
These unstable salts easily disproportionate into xenon gas and ''perxenate'' salts, containing the  anion.
When xenon atoms becomes energized, however, they can form an excimer (excited dimer) until the electrons return to the ground state.
At standard temperature and pressure, pure xenon gas has a density of 5.761&nbsp;kg/m3, about 4.5 times the density of the Earth's atmosphere at sea level, 1.217&nbsp;kg/m3.
Xenon inhibits Ca2+ ATPase by binding to a hydrophobic pore within the enzyme and preventing the enzyme from assuming active conformations.
Xenon has a minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of 72% at age 40, making it 44% more potent than N2O as an anesthetic.
Xenon and the other noble gases were for a long time considered to be completely chemically inert and not able to form compounds.
During the 1930s, American engineer Harold Edgerton began exploring strobe light technology for high speed photography.
Within the Solar System, the nucleon fraction of xenon is , for an abundance of approximately one part in 630&nbsp;thousand of the total mass.
This clathrate has a melting point of 24&nbsp;°C.
Deuterated molecules, HXeOD and DXeOH, have also been produced.
Since this isotope is generated by radioactive decay, the result may indicate that Mars lost most of its primordial atmosphere, possibly within the first 100 million years after the planet was formed.
It disproportionates at −20&nbsp;°C into  and .
In November 1999, IBM scientists demonstrated a technology capable of manipulating individual atoms.
Xenon was first used as a surgical anesthetic in 1951 by American anesthesiologist Stuart C. Cullen, who successfully used it with two patients.
The deuterated version of this hydrate has also been produced.
Liquid xenon is useful for these experiments because its density makes dark matter interaction more likely and it permits a quiet detector through self-shielding.
When xenon atoms are in the ground energy state, they repel each other and will not form a bond.
is formed by the partial hydrolysis of , or the reaction of  with sodium perxenate, .
such as in Lake Vostok underneath the Antarctic ice sheet.
Naturally occurring xenon is composed of eight stable isotopes.
Some radioactive isotopes of xenon (for example, 133Xe and 135Xe) are produced by neutron irradiation of fissionable material within nuclear reactors.
Although xenon is rare and relatively expensive to extract from the Earth's atmosphere, it has a number of applications.
Radioactive xenon-135 is produced by beta decay from iodine-135 (a product of nuclear fission), and is the most significant neutron absorber in nuclear reactors.
Liquid xenon is used in calorimeters to measure gamma rays, and as a detector of hypothetical weakly interacting massive particles, or WIMPs.
Unlike nitrous oxide (N2O), xenon is not a greenhouse gas and is viewed as environmentally friendly.
Xenon is relatively rare in the Sun's atmosphere, on Earth, and in asteroids and comets.
In 1934, Edgerton was able to generate flashes as brief as one microsecond with this method.
Another example is Xe hydride (Xe(H2)8), in which xenon pairs (dimers) are trapped inside solid hydrogen.
The compound  contains a Xe–Xe bond, the longest element-element bond known (308.71 pm = 3.0871 Å).
Xenon was discovered in England by the Scottish chemist William Ramsay and English chemist Morris Travers in September 1898, shortly after their discovery of the elements krypton and neon.
They are also employed in typical 35mm, IMAX, and digital film projection systems.
Although Russian toxicologist Nikolay V. Lazarev apparently studied xenon anesthesia in 1941, the first published report confirming xenon anesthesia was in 1946 by American medical researcher John H. Lawrence, who experimented on mice.
These two events (supernova and solidification of gas cloud) were inferred to have happened during the early history of the Solar System, because the 129I isotope was likely generated shortly before the Solar System was formed, seeding the solar gas cloud with isotopes from a second source.
In addition to compounds where xenon forms a chemical bond, xenon can form clathrates—substances where xenon atoms or pairs are trapped by the crystalline lattice of another compound.
The gas sulfur hexafluoride is similar to xenon in molecular weight (146 versus 131), less expensive, and though an asphyxiant, not toxic or anesthetic; it is often substituted in these demonstrations.
That is, the chromaticity of these lamps closely approximates a heated black body radiator at the temperature of the Sun.
The typical lifetime of a xenon excimer is 1–5&nbsp;ns, and the decay releases photons with wavelengths of about 150 and 173&nbsp;nm.
The low thermal conductivity minimizes thermal losses in the lamp while in the operating state, and the low ionization potential causes the breakdown voltage of the gas to be relatively low in the cold state, which allows the lamp to be more easily started.
When metallized, xenon looks sky blue because it absorbs red light and transmits other visible frequencies.
Xenon is cardioprotective in ischemia-reperfusion conditions by inducing pharmacologic non-ischemic preconditioning.
One example is xenon hydrate (Xe•5.75 H2O), where xenon atoms occupy vacancies in a lattice of water molecules.
It can dissolve hydrocarbons, biological molecules, and even water.
Since O2 and xenon have almost the same first ionization potential, Bartlett realized that platinum hexafluoride might also be able to oxidize xenon.
Xenon is the preferred propellant for ion propulsion of spacecraft because of it has low ionization potential per atomic weight and can be stored as a liquid at near room temperature (under high pressure), yet easily evaporated to feed the engine.
Hence, xenon vibrates more slowly in the vocal chords when exhaled and produces lowered voice tones, an effect opposite to the high-toned voice produced in helium.
Other compounds containing xenon bonded to a less electronegative element include  and .
More than 30 such complexes have been synthesized and characterized.
Because xenon is a tracer for two parent isotopes, xenon isotope ratios in meteorites are a powerful tool for studying the formation of the solar system.
Xenon is cardioprotective by activating PKC-epsilon and downstream p38-MAPK.
XeF is theorized to be unstable.
Unlike the lower mass noble gases, the normal stellar nucleosynthesis process inside a star does not form xenon.
:  + 2  → 2  + 2  +
This led him to the invention of the xenon flash lamp in which light is generated by passing brief electric current through a tube filled with xenon gas.
Xenon is a high affinity antagonist at the NMDA receptor glycine site.
It explodes above −35.9&nbsp;°C into xenon and oxygen gas.
These isotopes are monitored to ensure compliance with nuclear test ban treaties, and to confirm nuclear tests by states such as North Korea.
By additional fractional distillation, the liquid oxygen may be enriched to contain 0.1–0.2% of a krypton/xenon mixture, which is extracted either by absorption onto silica gel or by distillation.
It was the first time atoms had been precisely positioned on a flat surface.
In 1939, American physician Albert R. Behnke Jr. began exploring the causes of "drunkenness" in deep-sea divers.
Such clathrate hydrates can occur naturally under conditions of high pressure,
For example, the atmosphere of Mars shows a xenon abundance similar to that of Earth (0.08&nbsp;parts per million) but Mars shows a greater abundance of 129Xe than the Earth or the Sun.
The green, paramagnetic  is formed by the reduction of  by xenon gas.
However, xenon is different from other NMDA receptor antagonists in that it is not neurotoxic and it inhibits the neurotoxicity of ketamine and nitrous oxide.
Xenon emits a band of emission lines that span the visual spectrum, but the most intense lines occur in the region of blue light, producing the coloration.
To prevent decomposition, the xenon tetroxide thus formed is quickly cooled to form a pale-yellow solid.
In contrast, 131Xe has a nuclear spin value of  and a nonzero quadrupole moment, and has t1 relaxation times in the millisecond and second ranges.
In 1902, Ramsay estimated the proportion of xenon in the Earth's atmosphere to be one part in 20 million.
Xenon is a high-affinity glycine-site NMDA receptor antagonist.
* , where X is CN, F, or Cl.
The treatment is done simultaneously with cooling the body temperature to .
Xenon was first used for satellite ion engines during the 1970s.
Applied at pressures from 0.5 to 5&nbsp;MPa (5 to 50&nbsp;atm) to a protein crystal, xenon atoms bind in predominantly hydrophobic cavities, often creating a high-quality, isomorphous, heavy-atom derivative that can be used for solving the phase problem.
Xenon is used to search for hypothetical weakly interacting massive particles and as the propellant for ion thrusters in spacecraft.
A by-product of nuclear weapon testing is the release of radioactive xenon-133 and xenon-135.
Dense gases such as xenon and sulfur hexafluoride can be breathed safely when mixed with at least 20% oxygen.
Whereas the xenon fluorides are well-characterized, with the exception of dichloride XeCl2, the other halides are not known.
The latter hormone is known to increase red blood cell production and athletic performance.
This is more than any other element except tin, which has ten.
Xenon gas can be safely kept in normal sealed glass or metal containers at standard temperature and pressure.
Naturally occurring xenon consists of eight stable isotopes.
On August 31, 2014, the World Anti Doping Agency (WADA) added Xenon (and Argon) to the list of prohibited substances and methods, although no reliable doping tests for these gases have yet been developed.
First introduced in the 1940s, these lamps replaced the shorter-lived carbon arc lamps in movie projectors.
XeO2 forms when xenon tetrafluoride is poured over ice.
The XeOO+ cation has been identified by infrared spectroscopy in solid argon.
Xenon allosterically reduces ATP mediated channel activation inhibition independently of the sulfonylurea receptor1 subunit, increasing KATP open-channel time and frequency.
Xenon is used in flash lamps and arc lamps, and as a general anesthetic.
It may also be obtained by partial hydrolysis of .
When a WIMP collides with a xenon nucleus, theory predicts it will impart enough energy to cause ionization and scintillation.
Normally, it is difficult to characterize surfaces with NMR because signals from a surface are overwhelmed by signals from the atomic nuclei in the bulk of the sample.
Xenon upregulates hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha (HIF1a).
In addition, more than 40 unstable isotopes that have been studied.
In another example, excess 129Xe found in carbon dioxide well gases from New Mexico is believed to be from the decay of mantle-derived gases from soon after Earth's formation.
Xenon is used as a starter gas in  HID automotive headlights, and high-end "tactical" flashlights.
The latter reaction also produces a small amount of .
Though recycled in modern systems, xenon vented to the atmosphere is only returning to its original source, with no environmental impact.
135Xe reactor poisoning was a major factor in the Chernobyl disaster.
This produces a stable, minimum energy configuration in which the outer electrons are tightly bound.
Xenon is rarely used in large enough quantities for this to be a concern, though the potential for danger exists any time a tank or container of xenon is kept in an unventilated space.
It is completely metallic at 155&nbsp;GPa.
The isotopes 124Xe and 134Xe are predicted by theory to undergo double beta decay, but this has never been observed so they are considered stable.
The program, called IBM in atoms, used a scanning tunneling microscope to arrange 35 individual xenon atoms on a substrate of chilled crystal of nickel to spell out the three letter company acronym.
reported the preparation of HXeOXeH by the photolysis of water within a cryogenic xenon matrix.
The speed of sound in xenon gas (169&nbsp;m/s) is less than that in air because the average velocity of the heavy xenon atoms is less than that of nitrogen and oxygen molecules in air.
This abundance remains unexplained, but may have been caused by an early and rapid buildup of planetesimals—small, subplanetary bodies—before the heating of the presolar disk.
Hyperpolarized xenon can be used by surface chemists.
The latter is synthesized from dioxygenyl tetrafluoroborate, , at −100&nbsp;°C.
Xenon has atomic number 54; that is, its nucleus contains 54 protons.
It is inert to most common chemical reactions (such as combustion, for example) because the outer valence shell contains eight electrons.
Thus, it can be used with oxygen in concentrations that have a lower risk of hypoxia.
135Xe has a huge cross section for thermal neutrons, 2.6×106&nbsp;barns, and operates as a neutron absorber or "poison" that can slow or stop the chain reaction after a period of operation.
A shutdown or decrease of power of a reactor can result in buildup of 135Xe, with reactor operation going into a condition known as the iodine pit.
This ion occurs in the compound , and is remarkable in having direct chemical bonds between two notoriously unreactive atoms, xenon and gold, with xenon acting as a transition metal ligand.
These are the starting points for the synthesis of almost all xenon compounds.
The resulting spin polarization of xenon nuclei can surpass 50% of its maximum possible value, greatly exceeding the thermal equilibrium value dictated by paramagnetic statistics (typically 0.001% of the maximum value at room temperature, even in the strongest magnets).
Inhaling a xenon/oxygen mixture activates production of the transcription factor HIF-1-alpha, which may lead to increased production of erythropoietin.
Bartlett thought its composition to be Xe+PtF6−, but later work revealed that it was probably a mixture of various xenon-containing salts.
In the gas phase, it can image cavities in a porous sample, alveoli in lungs, or the flow of gases within the lungs.
Xenon induces robust cardioprotection and neuroprotection through a variety of mechanisms.
Under adverse conditions, relatively high concentrations of radioactive xenon isotopes may emanate from cracked fuel rods, or fissioning of uranium in cooling water.
Although generally unreactive, xenon can undergo a few chemical reactions such as the formation of xenon hexafluoroplatinate, the first noble gas compound to be synthesized.
Long-term heating of  at high temperatures under an  catalyst yields .
The longest lived of these isotopes is 136Xe, which undergoes double beta decay with a half-life of .
On March 23, 1962, he mixed the two gases and produced the first known compound of a noble gas, xenon hexafluoroplatinate.
Liquid xenon has a high polarizability due to its large atomic volume, and thus is an excellent solvent.
Under the same conditions, the density of solid xenon, 3.640&nbsp;g/cm3, is greater than the average density of granite, 2.75&nbsp;g/cm3.
This was discovered in the earliest nuclear reactors built by the American Manhattan Project for plutonium production.
Because of its scarcity, xenon is much more expensive than the lighter noble gases—approximate prices for the purchase of small quantities in Europe in 1999 were 10&nbsp;€/L for xenon, 1&nbsp;€/L for krypton, and 0.20&nbsp;€/L for neon, while the much more plentiful argon costs less than a cent per liter.
Theoretical calculations indicate that the linear molecule  is less stable than the van der Waals complex.
Because xenon is soluble both in water and in hydrophobic solvents, it can image various soft living tissues.
Xenon is an effective inhibitor of plasma membrane Ca2+ ATPase.
As a noble gas, it does not interfere with the chemical reactions occurring in the operating lamp.
Liquid or solid xenon nanoparticles can be formed at room temperature by implanting Xe+ ions into a solid matrix.
Xenon dichloride, formed by the high-frequency irradiation of a mixture of xenon, fluorine, and silicon or carbon tetrachloride, is reported to be an endothermic, colorless, crystalline compound that decomposes into the elements at 80&nbsp;°C.
