Dzungaria was known as Zhunbu (準部, "Dzungar region") and the Tarim Basin was known as '''Huijiang''' (回疆, "Muslim Frontier") during the Qing dynasty before both regions were merged and became the province of Xinjiang, which literally means "New Frontier" or "New Border", in the 1880s.
In 1132, remnants of the Liao dynasty from Manchuria entered Xinjiang, fleeing the rebellion of their neighbors, the Jurchens.
Southern Xinjiang, with 95% non-Han population, has an average per capita income half that of Xinjiang as a whole.
One of his subordinates, Yang Zengxin, took control of the province and acceded in name to the Republic of China in March of the same year.
Railways to Pakistan and Kyrgyzstan have been proposed.
The autonomous region of the PRC was established on October 1, 1955, replacing the province.
It is a key factor in Xinjiang's economic development.
The Kara-Khanids converted to Islam.
On June 5, 2014, China sentenced nine persons to death for terrorist attacks.
Since the Chinese economic reform from the late 1970s has exacerbated uneven regional development, more Uyghurs have migrated to Xinjiang cities and some Hans have also migrated to Xinjiang for independent economic advancement.
It is the largest Chinese administrative division, the 8th largest country subdivision in the world, spanning over 1.6 million km2 (0.64 million square&nbsp;miles).
According to the Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies, the two main sources for separatism in the Xinjiang Province are religion and ethnicity.
A majority of the Uyghur Muslims adhere to Sunni Islam of the Hanafi school of jurisprudence or madhab.
its rivers either disappear in the desert, or terminate in salt lakes (within Xinjiang itself, or in the neighboring Kazakhstan), instead of flowing toward an ocean.
More than one decade of Sheng's era had stopped.
The 700 m-long Guozi Valley Cable Bridge over the expressway is now currently being constructed, with the 24 main pile foundations already completed.
Xinjiang is divided into the Dzungarian Basin in the north and the Tarim Basin in the south by a mountain range.
In 1912, the Qing dynasty was replaced by the Republic of China.
The construction of the first expressway in the mountainous area of Xinjiang began a new stage in its construction on July 24, 2007.
Together, the Northern Xinjiang and the Lanzhou-Xinjiang lines form part of the Trans-Eurasian Continental Railway, which extends from Rotterdam, on the North Sea, to Lianyungang, on the East China Sea.
With a documented history of at least 2,500 years, a succession of peoples and empires has vied for control over all or parts of this territory.
However, a situation similar to the Qing era-demographics with a large number of Han had been restored by 2000 with 40.57% Han and 45.21% Uyghur.
The short-lived kingdoms that ruled northwestern China one after the other, including Former Liang, Former Qin, Later Liang, and Western Liáng, all attempted to maintain the protectorate, with varying degrees of success.
A monument to this effect was then erected there and the site has become a local tourist attraction.
He described the ''Yushi'' 禺氏 (or ''Niushi'' 牛氏), as a people from the north-west who supplied jade to the Chinese from the nearby mountains (also known as Yushi) in Gansu.
Although Xinjiang as a whole is designated as a "Uyghur Autonomous Region", since 1954 more than 50% of Xinjiang's land area are designated autonomous areas for 13 native non-Uyghur groups.
The Second Ürümqi-Jinghe Railway provides additional rail transport capacity to Jinghe, from which the Jinghe-Yining-Horgos Railway heads into the Ili River Valley to Yining, Huocheng, and Khorgos, a second rail border crossing with Kazakhstan.
China states that the region has been part of China since ancient times, and now calls it Xinjiang Province.
After being converted to Islam, the descendants of the previously Buddhist Uyghurs in Turfan failed to retain memory of their ancestral legacy and falsely believed that the "infidel Kalmuks" (Dzungars) were the ones who built Buddhist monuments in their area.
The Uyghurs are ethnically, linguistically, and culturally Turkic, a clear distinction from the Han and other ethnicities that are the majority in the eastern regions of China.
The extremely rugged Karakoram, Kunlun, and Tian Shan mountain ranges occupy much of Xinjiang's borders, as well as its western and southern regions.
Xinjiang also opened its second border trade market to Kazakhstan in March 2006, the Jeminay Border Trade Zone.
This was in an effort to secure the profitable routes of the Silk Road.
Containing over a fifth of China's coal, natural gas and oil resources, Xinjiang has the highest concentration of fossil fuel reserves of any region in the country.
Despite having 9% of Xinjiang's population, Urumqi accounts for 25% of the region's GDP, and many rural Uyghurs have been migrating to that city to seek work in the dominant light, heavy, and petrochemical industries.
It is given to particular nationalities."
Kazakhs are mostly concentrated in Ili prefecture in northern Xinjiang.
In the 17th century, the Dzungars established an empire over much of the region.
All of the jade items excavated from the tomb of Fuhao of the Shang dynasty, more than 750 pieces, were from Khotan in modern Xinjiang.
As reported by the BBC News, "China strictly controls media access to Xinjiang so reports are difficult to verify."
Traversed by the Northern Silk Road, the Tarim and Dzungaria regions were known as the Western Regions.
This Uyghur state remained in eastern Xinjiang until the 13th century, though it was subject to foreign overlords during that time.
During the Qing rule, no sense of "regional identity" was held by ordinary Xinjiang people; rather, Xinjiang's distinct identity was given to the region by the Qing, since it had distinct geography, history and culture, while at the same time it was created by the Chinese, multicultural, settled by Han and Hui, and separated from Central Asia for over a century and a half.
According to a demographic analysis of the year 2010, Muslims form 58% of the province's population.
The oil and petrochemical sector account for 60% of Xinjiang's local economy.
Professor James A. Millward described the original Uyghurs as physically Mongoloid, giving as an example the images in Bezeklik at temple 9 of the Uyghur patrons, until they began to mix with the Tarim Basin's original eastern Iranian inhabitants.
The 5th Dalai Lama then called upon his Dzungar Buddhist followers in the Dzungar Khanate to act on this invitation.
After Genghis Khan unified Mongolia and began his advance west, the Uyghur state in the Turpan-Urumchi area offered its allegiance to the Mongols in 1209, contributing taxes and troops to the Mongol imperial effort.
The capital, Urumqi, is home to the Xinjiang University baseball team, an integrated Uyghur and Han group profiled in the documentary film ''Diamond in the Dunes''.
Due to the lack of access to the ocean, and limited amount of inland water, Xinjiang's fish resources are somewhat limited.
Regardless of the ethnicity of their proprietors, most businesses and schools open and close according to Xinjiang time, i.e.
Over 3,000 construction workers have been involved.
These leaders engaged in wars with each other and the Timurids of Transoxania to the west and the Oirats to the east, the successor Chagatai regime based in Mongolia and in China.
Mao agreed and the administrative region was named "Xinjiang ''Uyghur'' Autonomous Region" to recognize its significant ethnic Uyghur population.
Major ethnic groups in Xinjiang by region (2000 census)P = Prefecture; AP = Autonomous prefecture; PLC = Prefecture-level city; DACLC = Directly administered county-level city.
Due to the hot summer and low precipitation, most of Xinjiang is endorheic, i.e.
Saifuddin Azizi, the first chairman of Xinjiang, registered his strong objections to the proposed name with Mao Zedong, arguing that "autonomy is not given to mountains and rivers.
– ''Altay Prefecture''
In return, the Uyghur rulers retained control of their kingdom.
Changji AP + Wujiaqu DACLC
The Khoja brothers decided to renege on this deal and declare themselves as independent leaders of the Tarim Basin.
In 2000, Uyghurs "comprised 45 per cent of Xinjiang's population, but only 12.8 per cent of Urumqi's population."
The Han Chinese of Xinjiang arrived at different times, from different directions and social backgrounds: They are descendants of criminals and officials who had been exiled from China proper during the second half of the eighteenth and first half of the 19th centuries; descendants of families of military and civil officers from Hunan, Yunnan, Gansu and Manchuria; descendants of merchants from Shanxi, Tianjin, Hubei and Hunan and descendants of peasants who started immigrating into the region in 1776.
It was inhabited by various peoples, including Indo-European Tocharians in Turfan and Kucha and Indo-Iranian Saka peoples centered around Kashgar and Khotan.
Xinjiang borders the countries of Mongolia, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan and India.
Horgos is the largest "land port" in China's western region and it has easy access to the Central Asian market.
Han and Hui merchants were initially only allowed to trade in the Tarim Basin, while Han and Hui settlement in the Tarim Basin was banned, until the Muhammad Yusuf Khoja invasion, in 1830 when the Qing rewarded the merchants for fighting off Khoja by allowing them to settle down.
The oil and gas extraction industry in Aksu and Karamay is booming, with the West–East Gas Pipeline connecting to Shanghai.
Some of the salt lakes, having lost much of their fresh water inflow, are now extensively use for the production of mineral salts (used e.g., in the manufacturing of potassium fertilizers); this includes the Lop Lake and the Manas Lake.
The Manchu Qing dynasty of China gained control over eastern Xinjiang as a result of a long struggle with the Dzungars that began in the 17th century.
In the north, in the Tian Shan, the Kyrgyz and Kazakhs are Sunni.
Christianity in Xinjiang is the religion of 1% of the population according to the Chinese General Social Survey of 2009.
– ''former Ili Prefecture''
In the west, the Tian Shan split, forming the Ili River valley.
The project started in August 2006 and several stages have been fully operational since March 2007.
The Mongolian Dzungar was the collective identity of several Oirat tribes that formed and maintained one of the last nomadic empires.
Aksu Prefecture + Aral DACLC
The Western Jin dynasty succumbed to successive waves of invasions by nomads from the north at the beginning of the 4th century.
In the past, the Lop Lake was known for its fisheries, and the area residents, for their fishing culture; now, due to the diversion of the waters of the Tarim River, the lake has dried out.
The  highway linking Sayram Lake and Guozi Valley in Northern Xinjiang area had cost 2.39 billion yuan.
Highway 312 national highway Xinjiang section, connects Xinjiang with China's east coast, central and western Asia, plus some parts of Europe.
Jin drafted White Russians to crush the revolt.
Even then, a significant part of this river's waters is now artificially diverted, via the Irtysh–Karamay–Ürümqi Canal, to the drier areas of southern Dzungarian Basin.
It occupied the Tang capital of Chang'an in 763 for 16 days, and took control of southern Xinjiang by the end of the century.
Through Machiavellian politics and clever balancing of mixed ethnic constituencies, Yang maintained control over Xinjiang until his assassination in 1928 after the Northern Expedition of the Kuomintang.
In general, Uyghurs are the majority in southwestern Xinjiang, including the prefectures of Kashgar, Khotan, Kizilsu, and Aksu (about 80% of Xinjiang's Uyghurs live in those four prefectures), as well as Turpan prefecture in eastern Xinjiang.
Xinjiang, meaning "New Territory" or, officially, "old territory returned to the motherland", is a name given by the Qianlong Emperor of the Qing dynasty).
Meanwhile, after the Uyghur khanate in Mongolia had been smashed by the Kirghiz in 840, branches of the Uyghurs established themselves in Qocha (Karakhoja) and Beshbalik, near the modern cities of Turfan and Urumchi.
During the era of the Mongol Empire, the Yuan dynasty vied with the Chagatai Khanate for rule over the area, with the latter taking control of most of this region.
Continuous permafrost is typically found in the Tian Shan starting at the elevation of about 3,500-3,700 m above the sea level.
to suspects arrested following ethnic violence in the city of Urumqi in Xinjiang in 2009.
Although Khitan and Chinese were the primary languages of administration, the empire also administered in Persian and Uyghur.
Sheng invited a group of Chinese Communists to Xinjiang, including Mao Zedong's brother Mao Zemin, but in 1943, fearing a conspiracy, Sheng executed them all, including Mao Zemin.
"East Turkestan" was used traditionally to only refer to the Tarim Basin, and not Xinjiang as a whole, with Dzungaria being excluded from the area consisting of "East Turkestan".
A third outlet to the east connects Hami and Inner Mongolia.
Present-day Jinchuan County was known as "Jinchuan ''Xinjiang''", etc.
In 1992, local geographers determined another point within Xinjiang in the southwestern suburbs of Ürümqi, Ürümqi Countyto be the "center point of Asia".
– ''Tacheng Prefecture''
In 1944, then the President and Premier of China Chiang Kai-shek, was informed of Shicai's intention of joining the Soviet Union by Soviets, decided to shift him out of Xinjiang to Chongqing as the Minister of Agriculture and Forest.
Ethnic groups in Xinjiang.
The name that was originally proposed was simply "Xinjiang Autonomous Region".
During the Tang dynasty, a series of expeditions were conducted against the Western Turkic Khaganate, and their vassals, the oasis states of southern Xinjiang.
However, being roughly two time zones west of the capital, some residents, local organization and local government follow their own unofficial Xinjiang Time (UTC+6).
The modern Uyghurs are now a mixed hybrid of East Asian Mongoloid and Europoid Caucasian populations.
In 1955, Xinjiang province was renamed Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region.
Once they enter the populated areas in the mountains' foothills, their waters are extensively used for irrigation, so that the river often disappears in the desert instead of reaching the lake to whose basin it nominally belongs.
In the Kashgar region on November 12, 1933, the short-lived self-proclaimed First East Turkistan Republic was declared, after some debate over whether the proposed independent state should be called "East Turkestan" or "Uyghuristan".
Nomadic cultures such as the Yuezhi (Rouzhi) are documented in the area of Xinjiang where the first known reference to the Yuezhi was made in 645 BC by the Chinese Guan Zhong in his Guanzi (管子, Guanzi Essays: 73: 78: 80: 81).
It was brought back under Han control in 91 AD due to the efforts of the general Ban Chao.
For instance, it fell out of their control during the civil war against Wang Mang (r. 9-23 AD).
At the same time, the Uyghur Khaganate took control of northern Xinjiang, as well as much of the rest of Central Asia, including Mongolia.
In recent years, Xinjiang has been a focal point of ethnic and other tensions.
Discontinuous alpine permafrost usually occurs down to 2,700-3,300 m, but in certain locations, due to the peculiarity of the aspect and the microclimate, it can be found at elevations as low as 2,000 m.
Most of this area was only renamed "Xinjiang" by the Chinese after the fall of the Dzungar Empire.
As early as the mid-first millennium BC, the Yuezhi engaged in the jade trade, of which the major consumers were the rulers of agricultural China."
The separatist movement claims that the region, which they view as their fatherland and refer to as East Turkestan, is not part of China, but was invaded by China in 1949 and has been under Chinese occupation since then.
The majority of the Han (90%) population of Xinjiang, which is mostly urban, are in Northern Xinjiang.
Hans and Uyghurs are equally represented in Urumqi's floating population that works mostly in commerce.
From a low of 7% in 1953, the Han began to return to Xinjiang between then and 1964, where they comprised 33% of the population (54% Uyghur), similarly to Qing times.
The region claimed by the ETR in theory encompassed Kashgar, Khotan and Aqsu prefectures in southwestern Xinjiang.
Some western scholars have pointed out that the capital of Xinjiang Urumqi was originally a Han and Hui (Tungan) city with few Uyghur people before recent Uyghur migration to the city, but foreigners mistakenly think that Urumqi was originally a Uyghur city and that the Chinese destroyed its Uyghur character and culture.
It is home to a number of ethnic groups including the Han, Kazakhs, Tajiks, Hui, Uyghur,  Kyrgyz, Mongols, and Russians.
The Uyghur state in eastern Xinjiang remained Manichaean, but later converted to Buddhism.
During the Ili Rebellion the Soviet Union backed Uyghur separatists to form the Second East Turkistan Republic (2nd ETR) in Ili region while the majority of Xinjiang was under Republic of China Kuomintang control.
In the western mountains (the Pamirs), almost the entire population of Pamiris, (Sarikolis and Wakhis) are Nizari Ismaili Shia.
The only exception is the northernmost part of the region, where the Irtysh River, originating in the Altai Mountains, flows (via Kazakhstan and Russia) toward the Arctic Ocean.
Around 70,000 Russian immigrants were living in Xinjiang in 1945.
Religiously, the Uyghur peoples of Xinjiang follow Islam, while in the large cities of Han China, the primary religions practiced are Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism or a combination of the three, though the government of the People's Republic of China does not formally endorse or support any religious practices.
Some factions in Xinjiang province advocate establishing an independent country, which has caused tension and ethnic strife in Xinjiang province.
Hence, there is a noticeable voice of ethnic Uyghurs who would like to separate their region from China.
Consequently, Xinjiang is a major earthquake zone.
At the beginning of the Han dynasty (206 BC–AD 220), the region was subservient to the Xiongnu, a powerful nomadic people based in modern Mongolia.
In the south, the Southern Xinjiang Line from Turpan runs southwest along the southern footslopes of the Tian Shan into the Tarim Basin, with stops at Yanqi, Korla, Kuqa, Aksu, Maralbexi (Bachu), Artux, and Kashgar.
Increased ethnic contact and labor competition coincided with Uyghur separatist terrorism from the 1990s, such as the 1997 Ürümqi bus bombings.
In general Uyghurs resemble those peoples who live around them in Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, and Pakistan.
In recent decades, abundant oil and mineral reserves have been found in Xinjiang, and it is currently China's largest natural gas-producing region.
Older geological formations occur principally in the far north, where the Junggar Block is geologically part of Kazakhstan, and in the east, which is part of the North China Craton.
They succeeded in separating the Xiongnu from the Qiang peoples to the south, and also gained direct access to the Western Regions.
The separatist movement is led by ethnically Uyghur Muslim underground organizations, most notably the East Turkestan independence movement, against the Chinese government.
The Turkic Muslims of the Turfan and Kumul Oases then submitted to the Qing dynasty of China, and asked China to free them from the Dzungars.
Xinjiang is the largest political subdivision of China—it accounts for more than one sixth of China's total territory and a quarter of its boundary length.
The Qing dynasty waged war against the Dzungars for decades until finally defeating them and then Qing Manchu Bannermen carried out the Dzungar genocide, nearly wiping them from existence and depopulating Dzungaria.
In 2010, Uyghurs constituted a majority in the Tarim Basin, and a mere plurality in Xinjiang as a whole.
This situation has been followed by an imbalance in the economic situation between the two ethnic groups, since the Northern Junghar Basin (Dzungaria) has been more developed than the Uighur south.
The People's Liberation Army entered Xinjiang in 1949 and the Kuomintang commander Tao Zhiyue surrendered the province to them.
According to official statistics, the ratios of doctors, medical workers, medical clinics, and hospital beds to people surpass the national average, and immunization rates have reached 85%.
The Kumul Rebellion and other rebellions arose against his successor Jin Shuren in the early 1930s throughout Xinjiang, involving Uyghurs, other Turkic groups, and Hui (Muslim) Chinese.
Most of the overall import/export volume in Xinjiang was directed to and from Kazakhstan through Ala Pass.
Under the Han dynasty, which drove the Xiongnu empire out of the region in 60 BC, Xinjiang was previously known as '''Xiyu''' (西域) or '''Qurighar''' (Қуриғар), meaning "Western Region".
Professor Stanley W. Toops noted that today's demographic situation is similar to that of the early Qing period in Xinjiang.
The Turkic Muslim sedentary people of the Tarim Basin were originally ruled by the Chagatai Khanate while the nomadic Buddhist Oirat Mongol in Dzungaria ruled over the Dzungar Khanate.
Kazakhs are the majority in the northernmost part of Xinjiang.
In 60 BC Han China established the Protectorate of the Western Regions (西域都護府) at Wulei (烏壘; near modern Luntai) to oversee the entire region as far west as the Pamir Mountains, which would remain under the influence and suzerainty of the Han dynasty with some interruptions.
The population overall growth rate was 1.09%, with 1.63% of birth rate and 0.54% mortality rate.
To the west, the Northern Xinjiang runs along the northern footslopes of the Tian Shan range through Changji, Shihezi, Kuytun and Jinghe to the Kazakh border at Alashankou, where it links up with the Turkestan-Siberia Railway.
After the break-up of the Chagatai Khanate into smaller khanates in the mid-14th century, the region fractured and was ruled by numerous Persianized Mongol Khans simultaneously, including the ones of Moghulistan (with the assistance of the local Dughlat Emirs), Uigurstan (later Turpan), and Kashgaria.
# 2015– Shohrat Zakir (雪克来提·扎克尔, شۆھرەت زاكىر)
The Hami–Lop Nur Railway connects Hami with potassium salt mines in and around Lop Nur.
Military personnel are not counted and national minorities are undercounted in the Chinese census, as in most censuses.
The east-west chain of the Tian Shan separate Dzungaria in the north from the Tarim Basin in the south.
Its per capita GDP for 2009 was 19,798 RMB (2,898 USD), with a growth rate of 1.7%.
One writer, Wei Yuan, described the resulting desolation in what is now northern Xinjiang as: "an empty plain for several thousand ''li'', with no Oirat yurt except those surrendered."
Muslim Turkic peoples in Xinjiang include Uyghurs, Uzbeks, Kyrgyz, Tatars and the Kazakhs; Muslim Iranian peoples include Pamiris and the Sarikolis/Wakhis (often conflated as Pamiris); and Muslim Sino-Tibetan peoples such as the Hui.
It existed from the early 17th century to the mid-18th century.
Before 1831, only a few hundred Chinese merchants lived in southern Xinjiang oases (Tarim Basin) and only a few Uyghurs lived in northern Xinjiang (Dzungaria).
A census of Xinjiang under Qing rule in the early 19th century tabulated ethnic shares of the population as 30% Han and 60% Turkic, while it dramatically shifted to 6% Han and 75% Uyghur in the 1953 census.
In July 2010, ''China Daily'' reported that:
The population it covers is around 40 percent of the overall in Xinjiang, who contribute half of the GDP in the area.
The historical area of what is modern day Xinjiang consisted of the distinct areas of the Tarim Basin and Dzungaria, and was originally populated by Indo-European Tocharian and Iranic Saka peoples who practiced the Buddhist religion.
Culturally, Xinjiang maintains 81 public libraries and 23 museums, compared to none of each in 1949, and Xinjiang has 98 newspapers in 44 languages, up from 4 newspapers in 1952.
In the Xinjiang War (1937), the entire province was brought under the control of northeast Manchu warlord Sheng Shicai, who ruled Xinjiang for the next decade with close support from the Soviet Union, many of whose ethnic and security policies Sheng instituted in Xinjiang.
In 2002, there were 9,632,600 males (growth rate of 1.0%) and 9,419,300 females (growth rate of 2.2%).
The major religions in Xinjiang are Islam among the Uyghurs and the Hui Chinese minority, while many of the Han Chinese practice Chinese folk religions, Taoism, Confucianism and Buddhism.
The Karakorum highway (KKH) links Islamabad, Pakistan with Kashgar over the Khunjerab Pass.
In the Dzungarian basin, a similar situation occurs with most rivers that historically flowed into Lake Manas.
Human Rights Watch has documented the denial of due legal process and fair trials and failure to hold genuinely open trials as mandated by law e.g.
The entire region is marked by great seasonal differences in temperature and cold winters.
They were seeking to overthrow Chinese rule in Xinjiang, inspired by a global jihadi ideology.
As a result of these battles, the Chinese controlled the strategic region from the Ordos and Gansu corridor to Lop Nor.
The other major difference and source of friction with eastern China is ethnicity.
The general region of Xinjiang has been known by many names in earlier times including "Western Regions", Khotan, Khotay, Chinese Tartary, High Tartary, East Chagatay (it was eastern part of Chagatai Khanate), Moghulistan ("land of the Mongols"), Kashgaria, Altishahr ("the six cities" of the Tarim), Little Bokhara and Serindia (due to Indian cultural influence).
While some of the shift has be attributed to an increased Han presence, Uyghurs have also emigrated to other parts of China, where their numbers have increased steadily.
Xinjiang's nominal GDP was approximately 220 billion RMB (US$28 billion) in 2004 and increased to 657.4 billion RMB (US$104.3 billion) in 2011, due to exploration of the regions abundant reserves of coal, crude oil, and natural gas and the China Western Development policy introduced by the State Council to boost economic development in Western China.
Hans in Xinjiang are demographically older, better-educated, and work in higher-paying professions than their Uyghur cohabitants.
After 1821, the Qing changed the names of the other regained regions, and "Xinjiang" became the name specifically of present-day Xinjiang.
Bezeklik Thousand Buddha Caves is a major Buddhist site.
The territory came under the rule of the Qing dynasty in the 18th century, which was later replaced by the Republic of China government.
Older English-language reference works often refer to the area as "Chinese Turkestan".
Xinjiang consists of two main geographically, historically, and ethnically distinct regions with different historical names, Dzungaria north of the Tianshan Mountains and the Tarim Basin south of the Tianshan Mountains, before Qing China unified them into one political entity called Xinjiang province in 1884.
Han are the majority in eastern and northern Xinjiang (Dzungaria), including the cities of Urumqi, Karamay, Shihezi and the prefectures of Changjyi, Bortala, Bayin'gholin, Ili (especially the cities of Kuitun), and Kumul.
Self-segregation within the city is widespread, in terms of residential concentration, employment relationships, and a social norm of endogamy.
The nearby kingdom of Karasahr was captured by the Tang in 644 and the kingdom of Kucha was conquered in 649.
In the 2nd century BC, the Han dynasty made preparations for war when Emperor Wu of Han dispatched the explorer Zhang Qian to explore the mysterious kingdoms to the west and to form an alliance with the Yuezhi people in order to combat the Xiongnu.
To the east, a conventional and a high-speed rail line runs through  Turpan and Hami to Lanzhou in Gansu Province.
It contains the disputed territory of Aksai Chin administered by China.
Elsewhere, most of Xinjiang's rivers are comparatively short streams fed by the snows of the several ranges of the Tian Shan.
Nonetheless, there is a significant amount of fishing in Lake Ulungur and Lake Bosten and in the Irtysh River.
The name "East Turkestan" was created by Russian Sinologist Hyacinth to replace the term "Chinese Turkestan" in 1829.
After 1831 the Qing permitted and encouraged Han Chinese migration into the Tarim basin in southern Xinjiang, although with very little success, and stationed permanent troops on the land there as well.
The Dzungar Khanate then conquered the Tarim Basin in 1680, setting up the Afaqi Khoja as their puppet ruler.
