Yale's student tour guides tell visitors that students consider it good luck to rub the toe of the statue of Theodore Dwight Woolsey on Old Campus.
Most financial aid is in the form of grants and scholarships that do not need to be paid back to the university, and the average need-based aid grant for the Class of 2017 was $46,395.
Current location, brick colonial; Shabtai, 1882, the Anderson Mansion built in the Second Empire architectural style; and Wolf's Head, Bertram Grosvenor Goodhue (erected 1923–1924).
Yale has had many financial supporters, but some stand out by the magnitude or timeliness of their contributions.
New international Yale initiatives launched included (among many others):
It is located near the center of the University in Hewitt Quadrangle, which is now more commonly referred to as "Beinecke Plaza".
Yale is committed to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions 10% below 1990 levels by the year 2020.
The school color, since 1894, is Yale Blue.
Yale President Richard Levin attributes the run to Yale's focus on creating "a laboratory for future leaders," an institutional priority that began during the tenure of Yale Presidents Alfred Whitney Griswold and Kingman Brewster.
In 1887, under an act passed by the Connecticut General Assembly, Yale gained its current, and shorter, name of "Yale University."
During an age of tremendous expansion in higher education, Porter resisted the rise of the new research university, claiming that an eager embrace of its ideals would corrupt undergraduate education.
Alumnus Eero Saarinen, Finnish-American architect of such notable structures as the Gateway Arch in St.&nbsp;Louis, Washington Dulles International Airport main terminal, Bell Labs Holmdel Complex and the CBS Building in Manhattan, designed Ingalls Rink at Yale and the newest residential colleges of Ezra Stiles and Morse.
Yale's central campus in downtown New Haven covers  and comprises its main, historic campus and a medical campus adjacent to the Yale-New Haven Hospital.
Of the 2010–2011 freshman class, 10% are non‑U.S.
All registered student organizations are regulated and funded by a subsidiary organization of the YCC, known as the Undergraduate Organizations Committee (UOC).
Eleven campus buildings are candidates for LEED design and certification.
James Noyes II (son of James Noyes), James Pierpont, Abraham Pierson, Noadiah Russell, Joseph Webb and Timothy Woodbridge, all alumni of Harvard, met in the study of Reverend Samuel Russell in Branford, Connecticut, to pool their books to form the school's library.
One change that will be issued is the title of "master" for faculty members who serve as residential college leaders will be renamed to "head of college" due to its connotation of slavery.
Students compete for their respective residential colleges, fostering a friendly rivalry.
These tower forms at Yale act in counterpoint to the college's many Gothic spires and Georgian cupolas.
Yale's history department has also originated important intellectual trends.
File:Kroon Hall exterior - 1.jpg|Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies
File:Yale Peabody Museum 2.JPG|Yale Peabody Museum
Yale University, one of the oldest universities in the United States, is a cultural referent as an institution that produces some of the most elite members of society and its grounds, alumni, and students have been prominently portrayed in fiction and U.S. popular culture.
In 1718, at the behest of either Rector Samuel Andrew or the colony's Governor Gurdon Saltonstall, Cotton Mather contacted a successful businessman named Elihu Yale, who lived in Wales but had been born in Boston and whose father, David, had been one of the original settlers in New Haven, to ask him for financial help in constructing a new building for the college.
Another fight song sung at games is "Boola Boola".
File:memorial_quadrangle_gate.jpg|Memorial Quadrangle Gate
Charles B. Johnson, a 1954 graduate of Yale College, pledged a $250 million gift in 2013 to support the construction of two new residential colleges.
Stiles' greatest challenge occurred in July 1779 when hostile British forces occupied New Haven and threatened to raze the College.
In addition to these unions, officers of the Yale University Police Department are members of the Yale Police Benevolent Association, which affiliated in 2005 with the Connecticut Organization for Public Safety Employees.
The year is divided into fall, winter, and spring seasons, each of which includes about ten different sports.
Yale has a complicated relationship with its home city; for example, thousands of students volunteer every year in a myriad of community organizations, but city officials, who decry Yale's exemption from local property taxes, have long pressed the university to do more to help.
Coe was concerned to celebrate the 'values' of the Western United States in order to meet the "threat of communism."
The money went toward behavioral science research, which was supported by foundation officers who aimed to "improve mankind" under an informal, loosely defined human engineering effort.
98% of students graduate within six years.
Dedicated to the new scientific medicine established in Germany, he was equally fervent about "social medicine" and the study of humans in their culture and environment.
Through its program of need-based financial aid, Yale commits to meet the full demonstrated financial need of all applicants.
Yale's secret societies include Skull and Bones, Scroll and Key, Wolf's Head, Book and Snake, Elihu, Berzelius, St.&nbsp;Elmo, Manuscript, Shabtai and Mace and Chain.
Wimsatt, and Cleanth Brooks were all Yale faculty.
There even were rallies sending off the debating teams to matches.
("Bright College Years," the University's alma mater, was penned in 1881 by Henry Durand, Class of 1881, to the tune of ''Die Wacht am Rhein''.)
The Academic Ranking of World Universities placed Yale at 11th in the world in 2016.
Vassar, then all-female and part of the Seven Sisters—elite higher education schools that historically served as sister institutions to the Ivy League when the Ivy League still only admitted men—tentatively accepted, but then declined the invitation.
Various sources note the spirit of campus activism that has existed at Yale since the 1960s, and the intellectual influence of Reverend William Sloane Coffin on many of the future candidates.
In the wake of the racially-motivated church shooting in Charleston, South Carolina, Yale was under criticism again in the summer of 2015 for Calhoun College, one of 12 residential colleges, which was named after John C. Calhoun, a slave-owner and strong slavery supporter in the nineteenth century.
In 2007 Deputy Provost Kim Bottomly was named President of Wellesley College.
The colleges are led by a head and an academic dean, who reside in the college, and university faculty and affiliates comprise each college's fellowship.
President Arthur Hadley of Yale, A. Lawrence Lowell of Harvard, and Woodrow Wilson of Princeton worked to develop moderate changes to reduce injuries.
Several are associated with members of the Vanderbilt family, including Vanderbilt Hall, Phelps Hall, St. Anthony Hall (a commission for member Frederick William Vanderbilt), the Mason, Sloane and Osborn laboratories, dormitories for the Sheffield Scientific School (the engineering and sciences school at Yale until 1956) and elements of Silliman College, the largest residential college.
However, Yale graduate Edmund Fanning, Secretary to the British General in command of the occupation, interceded and the College was saved.
The Beinecke Rare Book Library has a large collection of rare books and manuscripts.
Yale has graduated many notable alumni, including five U.S. Presidents, 19 U.S. Supreme Court Justices, 13 living billionaires, and many foreign heads of state.
In addition, the Yale Drama Coalition serves to coordinate between and provide resources for the various Sudler Fund sponsored theater productions which run each weekend.
* Jackson Institute for Global Affairs, promoting international education University-wide;
The school mascot is "Handsome Dan," the Yale bulldog, and the Yale fight song (written by Cole Porter while he was a student at Yale) contains the refrain, "Bulldog, bulldog, bow wow wow."
File:Yale-library-counter.jpg|The Library Circulation Desk
He may have misunderstood some of the challenges of his time, but he correctly anticipated the enduring tensions that have accompanied the emergence and growth of the modern university.
In 2009, former British Prime Minister Tony Blair picked Yale as one location – the others are Britain's Durham University and Universiti Teknologi Mara – for the Tony Blair Faith Foundation's United States Faith and Globalization Initiative.
Yet, the debates never attained the broad appeal that athletics enjoyed.
In addition, with late 19th-century concerns about the impact of modern life on the human body, athletics offered hope that neither the individual nor the society was coming apart.
The American studies program reflected the worldwide anti-Communist ideological struggle.
The Revolutionary War soldier Nathan Hale (Yale 1773) was the prototype of the Yale ideal in the early 19th&nbsp;century: a manly yet aristocratic scholar, equally well-versed in knowledge and sports, and a patriot who "regretted" that he "had but one life to lose" for his country.
Yale-educated Presidents since the end of the Vietnam War include Gerald Ford, George H.W.
In a 2003 strike, however, the university claimed that more union employees were working than striking.
The sculptures in the sunken courtyard by Isamu Noguchi are said to represent time (the pyramid), the sun (the circle), and chance (the cube).
Their attempts, however, were reduced by rebellion against the rules committee and formation of the Intercollegiate Athletic Association.
In 2008 Provost Andrew Hamilton was confirmed to be the Vice Chancellor of the University of Oxford.
* Yale India Initiative, expanding the study of and engagement with India;
Yale also maintains the Gales Ferry site where the heavyweight men's team trains for the Yale-Harvard Boat Race.
The latter, Louis Kahn's first large-scale American work (1953), was renovated and reopened in December 2006.
Every year, Yale College also admits a small group of non-traditional students through the Eli Whitney Students Program.
He established the "Yale System" of teaching, with few lectures and fewer exams, and strengthened the full-time faculty system; he also created the graduate-level Yale School of Nursing and the Psychiatry Department, and built numerous new buildings.
Expansion caused controversy about Yale's new roles.
Fanning later was granted an honorary degree LL.D., at 1803, for his efforts.
The campus includes several fraternities and sororities.
Yale has a history of difficult and prolonged labor negotiations, often culminating in strikes.
In the 1970s and 1980s, poverty and violent crime rose in New Haven, dampening Yale's student and faculty recruiting efforts.
In 1887, as the college continued to grow under the presidency of Timothy Dwight&nbsp;V, Yale College was renamed Yale University, with the name Yale College subsequently applied to the undergraduate college.
Popular among undergraduates, the program sought to instruct them in the fundamentals of American civilization and thereby instill a sense of nationalism and national purpose.
File:Yale_School_of_Management_Evans_Hall_front.JPG|The Yale School of Management
Together with the Graduate Employees and Students Organization (GESO), an unrecognized union of graduate employees, Locals&nbsp;34 and 35 make up the Federation of Hospital and University Employees.
Dwight Hall, an independent, non-profit community service organization, oversees more than 2,000 Yale undergraduates working on more than 70 community service initiatives in New Haven.
Yale alumni were represented on the Democratic or Republican ticket in every U.S. Presidential election between 1972 and 2004.
* Yale-University College London Collaboration; and
In 2004, the national non-profit watchdog group Security on Campus filed a complaint with the U.S.&nbsp;Department of Education, accusing Yale of under-reporting rape and sexual assaults.
It was ranked 15th in the 2016/17 ''QS World University Rankings'' and 12th in the 2016 ''Times Higher Education World University Rankings''.
All undergraduates are members of a college, to which they are assigned before their freshman year, and 85 percent live in the college quadrangle or a college-affiliated dormitory.
Similarly, the decorative friezes on the buildings depict contemporary scenes such as policemen chasing a robber and arresting a prostitute (on the wall of the Law School), or a student relaxing with a mug of beer and a cigarette.
Established to train Congregationalist ministers in theology and sacred languages, by 1777 the school's curriculum began to incorporate humanities and sciences.
Yale is noted for its largely Collegiate Gothic campus as well as for several iconic modern buildings commonly discussed in architectural history survey courses: Louis Kahn's Yale Art Gallery and Center for British Art, Eero Saarinen's Ingalls Rink and Ezra Stiles and Morse Colleges, and Paul Rudolph's Art & Architecture Building.
The twelve colleges are named for important alumni or significant places in university history.
Several campus safety strategies have been pioneered at Yale.
The emphasis on classics gave rise to a number of private student societies, open only by invitation, which arose primarily as forums for discussions of modern scholarship, literature and politics.
File:sterling_nave.jpg|The nave of Sterling Memorial Library
"Precision" is used here ironically; the band is a scatter-style band that runs wildly between formations rather than actually marching.
* UNSAAC-Yale Center for the Study of Machu Picchu and Inca Culture in Peru.
Yale is a medium-sized research university, most of whose students are in the graduate and professional schools.
Pickford's group was successful in spite of her lack of departmental or institutional position or power.
Former Dean of Yale College Richard H. Brodhead serves as the President of Duke University.
citizens, while 54% went to public high schools.
In western New Haven, the university holds  of athletic facilities, including the Yale Golf Course.
The architect, James Gamble Rogers, faux-aged these buildings by splashing the walls with acid, deliberately breaking their leaded glass windows and repairing them in the style of the Middle Ages, and creating niches for decorative statuary but leaving them empty to simulate loss or theft over the ages.
Offenses for which students were punished included cardplaying, tavern-going, destruction of college property, and acts of disobedience to college authorities.
Slack (2003) compares three groups that conducted biological research at Yale during overlapping periods between 1910 and 1970.
Later, the Yale Comparative literature department became a center of American deconstruction.
* Yale China Law Center, promoting the rule of law in China.
* Yale – Management Guild
Between 1990 and 2006, New Haven's crime rate fell by half, helped by a community policing strategy by the New Haven Police and Yale's campus became the safest among the Ivy League and other peer schools.
The Yale Center for British Art, the largest collection of British art outside of the UK, grew from a gift of Paul Mellon and is housed in another Kahn-designed building.
Yale's secret society buildings (some of which are called "tombs") were built both to be private yet unmistakable.
At the end of the year, the residential college with the most points (not all sports count equally) wins the Tyng Cup.
Richard H. Brodhead, former dean of Yale College and now president of Duke University, stated: "We do give very significant attention to orientation to the community in our admissions, and there is a very strong tradition of volunteerism at Yale."
Yale supports 35 varsity athletic teams that compete in the Ivy League Conference, the Eastern College Athletic Conference, the New England Intercollegiate Sailing Association.
File:Yale-Harvard-Game.jpg|The Yale Bowl
The narrator, Nick Carraway, wrote a series of editorials for the ''Yale News'', and Tom Buchanan was "one of the most powerful ends that ever played football" for Yale.
Not only that, but he also believed that the races he thought to be inferior, black people in particular, ought to be subjected to it for the sake of their own best interests."
File:Pierson_college.jpg|Pierson College courtyard
Yale traces its beginnings to "An Act for Liberty to Erect a Collegiate School," passed by the General Court of the Colony of Connecticut on October 9, 1701, while meeting in New Haven.
In addition to a central campus in downtown New Haven, the University owns athletic facilities in western New Haven, including the Yale Bowl, a campus in West Haven, Connecticut, and forest and nature preserves throughout New England.
File:MainCourtyardTrumbull.jpg|Trumbull College courtyard
File:Berkeley_College_(South)_at_Yale.jpg|Berkeley College buildings
Other examples of the Gothic (also called neo-Gothic and collegiate Gothic) style are on Old Campus by such architects as Henry Austin, Charles C. Haight and Russell Sturgis.
Nonetheless, across the board, the city of New Haven has retained the highest levels of crime of any Ivy League city for more than a decade.
Before World War&nbsp;II, most elite university faculties counted among their numbers few, if any, Jews, blacks, women, or other minorities; Yale was no exception.
Since 2006, the school's ice hockey clubs have played a commemorative game.
Half of all Yale undergraduates are women, more than 39% are ethnic minority U.S. citizens (19% are underrepresented minorities), and 10.5% are international students.
Moreover, Yale has been accused of failing to treat workers with respect.
Ultimately, the behavioral-science results disappointed foundation officers, who shifted their human-engineering funds toward biological sciences.
Instead, all undergraduate courses are taught by the Faculty of Arts and Sciences and are open to members of any college.
Noah Porter, moral philosopher, was president from 1871 to 1886.
Yale athletic teams compete intercollegiately at the NCAA Division&nbsp;I level.
* New global research and educational partnerships included (among many others):
Since summer 2010, Yale has also been host to Yale Publishing Course.
File:Starr Reading Room east.jpg|The Starr Reading Room in Sterling Memorial Library
News & World Report'' ranked Yale third among U.S. national universities for 2016, as it has for each of the past sixteen years, in every list trailing only Princeton and Harvard.
* Marsh Botanical Garden
The first such organizations were debating societies: Crotonia in 1738, Linonia in 1753, and Brothers in Unity in 1768.
In fact, the buildings merely simulate Middle Ages architecture, for though they appear to be constructed of solid stone blocks in the authentic manner, most actually have steel framing as was commonly used in 1930.
In addition, Yale has graduated hundreds of members of Congress and many high-level U.S. diplomats.
Yale is organized into fourteen constituent schools: the original undergraduate college, the Yale Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, and twelve professional schools.
Yale historian Gaddis Smith notes "an ethos of organized activity" at Yale during the 20th century that led John Kerry to lead the Yale Political Union's Liberal Party, George Pataki the Conservative Party, and Joseph Lieberman to manage the ''Yale Daily News''.
* Yale Sustainable Food Program Farm
It would also reorganize its relationship with the Sheffield Scientific School.
Rare books are found in several Yale collections.
In 2017, the university expects to open two new colleges near Science Hill.
A decade into co-education, rampant student assault and harassment by faculty became the impetus for the trailblazing lawsuit Alexander v. Yale.
The Yale College Council (YCC) serves as the campus's undergraduate student government.
He claimed that if they removed Calhoun's name, it would "obscure" his "legacy of slavery rather than addressing it."
He acknowledged that Calhoun also "believed that the highest forms of civilization depend on involuntary servitude.
Yale's museum collections are also of international stature.
The Reverend Ezra Stiles, president of the College from 1778 to 1795, brought with him his interest in the Hebrew language as a vehicle for studying ancient Biblical texts in their original language (as was common in other schools), requiring all freshmen to study Hebrew (in contrast to Harvard, where only upperclassmen were required to study the language) and is responsible for the Hebrew phrase אורים ותמים (Urim and Thummim) on the Yale seal.
He described Calhoun as a "a notable political theorist, a vice president to two different U.S. presidents, a secretary of war and of state, and a congressman and senator representing South Carolina."
Progress toward his plans for an Institute of Human Relations, envisioned as a refuge where social scientists would collaborate with biological scientists in a holistic study of humankind, unfortunately lasted for only a few years before the opposition of resentful anti-Semitic colleagues drove him to resign.
All produced innovative research, including the opening of new subfields in embryology, endocrinology, and ecology, respectively, over a long period of time.
The Yale International Relations Association functions as the umbrella organization for the top-ranked Model UN team.
Newspapers include the ''Yale Daily News'', which was first published in 1878, and the weekly ''Yale Herald'', which was first published in 1986.
In August 2015 Yale President Peter Salovey addressed the Freshman Class of 2019 in which he responded to the racial tensions but explained why the college would not be renamed.
CNN suggests that George W. Bush benefited from preferential admissions policies for the "son and grandson of alumni", and for a "member of a politically influential family."
Yale students claim to have invented Frisbee, by tossing empty Frisbie Pie Company tins.
For example, Owen Johnson's novel, ''Stover at Yale'', follows the college career of Dink Stover and Frank Merriwell, the model for all later juvenile sports fiction, plays football, baseball, crew, and track at Yale while solving mysteries and righting wrongs.
Later hired by the university, the officers were originally brought in to quell unrest between students and city residents and curb destructive student behavior.
Also during the 1940s and 1950s, Wyoming millionaire William Robertson Coe made large contributions to the American studies programs at Yale University and at the University of Wyoming.
File:hewitt_quad.jpg|Hewitt Quadrangle
The Yale University Collection of Musical Instruments, affiliated with the Yale School of Music, is perhaps the least-known of Yale's collections, because its hours of opening are restricted.
Two other fight songs, "Bulldog, Bulldog" and "Bingo Eli Yale", written by Cole Porter during his undergraduate days, are still sung at football games.
File:Timothy_dwight_ginkgo.jpg|Timothy Dwight College's ginkgo tree
Western painter Frederic Remington (Yale 1900) was an artist whose heroes gloried in combat and tests of strength in the Wild West.
During the period, Harvard was distinctive for the stability and maturity of its tutor corps, while Yale had youth and zeal on its side.
Racial tensions increased in the fall of 2015 centering on comments by Nicholas A. Christakis and his wife Erika regarding freedom of speech, which led to the labelling of some students as being members of Generation Snowflake.
The school was renamed Yale College in 1718 in recognition of a gift from Elihu Yale, who was governor of the British East India Company.
Yale seniors at graduation smash clay pipes underfoot to symbolize passage from their "bright college years," though in recent history the pipes have been replaced with "bubble pipes".
The Gilder Boathouse is named to honor former Olympic rower Virginia Gilder&nbsp;'79 and her father Richard Gilder&nbsp;'54, who gave $4&nbsp;million towards the $7.5&nbsp;million project.
While students used to broadcast on AM & FM frequencies, they now have an Internet-only stream.
Levesque argues Porter was not a simple-minded reactionary, uncritically committed to tradition, but a principled and selective conservative.
About 16% of the Class of 2013 had some form of student loan debt at graduation, with an average debt of $13,000 among borrowers.
Both schools introduced coeducation independently in 1969.
Many of Yale's buildings were constructed in the Collegiate Gothic architecture style from 1917 to 1931, financed largely by Edward S. Harkness Stone sculpture built into the walls of the buildings portray contemporary college personalities such as a writer, an athlete, a tea-drinking socialite, and a student who has fallen asleep while reading.
Under President Levin, Yale has financially supported many of New Haven's efforts to reinvigorate the city.
In 1977 Hanna Holborn Gray was appointed acting President of Yale from this position, and went on to become President of the University of Chicago, the first woman to be full president of a major university.
Other Yale alumni who made serious bids for the Presidency during this period include Hillary Clinton (2008), Howard Dean (2004), Gary Hart (1984 and 1988), Paul Tsongas (1992), Pat Robertson (1988) and Jerry Brown (1976, 1980, 1992).
The colleges have been named respectively in honor of Pauli Murray and Benjamin Franklin.
Harrison's group is shown to have been a classic research school; Pickford's and Hutchinson's were not.
In business, Time Magazine co-founder Henry Luce, Morgan Stanley founder Harold Stanley, Boeing CEO James McNerney, FedEx founder Frederick W. Smith, Time Warner president Jeffrey Bewkes, Electronic Arts co-founder Bing Gordon, Pinterest co-founder and CEO Ben Silbermann, and investor/philanthropist Sir John Templeton all hail from Yale.
In the second half of the 20th century Bladderball, a campus-wide game played with a large inflatable ball, became a popular tradition but was banned by administration due to safety concerns.
While Harkness' original colleges were Georgian Revival or Collegiate Gothic in style, two colleges constructed in the 1960s, Morse and Ezra Stiles Colleges, have modernist designs.
The Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library, designed by Gordon Bunshaft of Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, is one of the largest buildings in the world reserved exclusively for the preservation of rare books and manuscripts.
As the only college in Connecticut, Yale educated the sons of the elite.
Fifty-five percent attended public schools and 45% attended private, religious, or international schools, and 97% of students were in the top 10% of their high school class.
In 2004 Howard Dean stated, "In some ways, I consider myself separate from the other three (Yale) candidates of 2004.
The Harvey Cushing/John Hay Whitney Medical Library includes important historical medical texts, including an impressive collection of rare books, as well as historical medical instruments.
Undergraduates, or Yale College students, come from a variety of ethnic, national, and socioeconomic backgrounds.
While unsuccessful in the courts, the legal reasoning behind the case changed the landscape of sex discrimination law and resulted in the establishment of Yale's Grievance Board and the Yale Women's Center.
In the 19th century the school incorporated graduate and professional instruction, awarding the first Ph.D. in the United States in 1861 and organizing as a university in 1887.
Amy Solomon was the first woman to register as a Yale undergraduate; she was also the first woman at Yale to join an undergraduate society, St. Anthony Hall.
The big three had tried to operate independently of the majority, but changes did reduce injuries.
In spite of administration opposition, students revived the game in 2009, 2011, and 2014, but its future remains uncertain.
In 1909–10, football faced a crisis resulting from the failure of the previous reforms of 1905–06 to solve the problem of serious injuries.
The feud caused the Mathers to champion the success of the Collegiate School in the hope that it would maintain the Puritan religious orthodoxy in a way that Harvard had not.
For example, Yerkes analyzed chimpanzee sexual behavior in hopes of illuminating the evolutionary underpinnings of human development and providing information that could ameliorate dysfunction.
As of 2009, former Mexican President Ernesto Zedillo is the director of the Yale Center for the Study of Globalization and teaches an undergraduate seminar, "Debating Globalization".
