The largest orders in the Yangtze are Cypriniformes (280 species, including 150 endemics), Siluriformes (40 species, including 20 endemics), Perciformes (50 species, including 4 endemics), Tetraodontiformes (12 species, including 1 endemic) and Osmeriformes (8 species, including 1 endemic).
The ROC capital was located in Nanjing in the periods 1911–12, 1927–37, and 1945–49.
The Yangtze River plays a large role in the history, culture and economy of China.
The first lakes to be reconnected in 2004 were Zhangdu Lake, Honghu Lake, and Tian'e-Zhou in Hubei province on the middle Yangtze.
Returning upriver, the gunboat reached Hankow in August and Ichang in September where she wintered over owing to both the dry season and the outbreak of rebellion at Wuchang in October 1911.
China in the first fifty years of the 20th century, was in low-grade chaos.
The survival of these two sturgeon may rely on the continued release of captive bred specimens.
Warlords, revolutions, natural disasters, civil war and invasions contributed.
Opponents of the dam point out that there are three different kinds of floods on the Yangtze River: floods which originate in the upper reaches, floods which originate in the lower reaches, and floods along the entire length of the river.
It drains one-fifth of the land area of the People's Republic of China (PRC) and its river basin is home to one-third of the country's population.
File:Wuhan Yangtze River Bridge-1.jpg|Wuhan Yangtze River Bridge, the first bridge crossing Yangtze, was completed in 1957.
Four of China's five main freshwater lakes contribute their waters to the Yangtze River.
Numerous species of land mammals are found in the Yangtze valley, but most of these are not directly associated with the river.
The first merchant steamer in China, the ''Jardine'', was built to order for the firm of Jardine Matheson in 1835.
These include some of the longest suspension and cable-stayed bridges in the world on the Yangtze Delta: Jiangyin Suspension Bridge (1,385 m, opened in 1999), Runyang Bridge (1,490 m, opened 2005), Sutong Bridge (1,088 m, opened 2008).
Other animals facing immediate threat of extinction are the Baiji Dolphin, finless porpoise and the Yangtze Alligator.
It has been argued that the extinction of the Yangtze River dolphin was a result of the completion of the Three Gorges Dam, a project that has affected many species of animals and plant life found only in the gorges area.
However, as there have been no confirmed sightings since 2004, the ''baiji'' is presumed to be functionally extinct at this time.
This is the largest comprehensive irrigation project in the world and has a significant impact on China's agriculture.
The river stood as a major geographic barrier dividing northern and southern China.
Historically, the Yangtze became the political boundary between north China and south China several times (see History of China) because of the difficulty of crossing the river.
The name is derived the Classical Tibetan for "Marsh River" (, w&nbsp;''Dam Chu'').
The river was called '''Quian''' () and '''Quiansui''' () by Marco Polo and appeared on the earliest English maps as '''Kian''' or '''Kiam''', all recording dialects which preserved forms of the Middle Chinese pronunciation of  as ''Kæwng''.
In the ''Tribute to Yu'', written in the fifth century BCE, this section is called the ''Hei Shui''   or the "Black Water."
As a result, the Royal Mail Steam Packet Company invited the firm to attend to the Agency of their Shire Line which operated in the Far East.
File:Jiujiang Yangtze River Bridge.jpg|The Jiujiang Yangtze River Bridge, an arch bridge, was completed in 1992.
It was then transhipped by liner back to Marseille and France (i.e.
File:Caiyuanba bridge.jpg|The Caiyuanba Bridge, an arch bridge in Chongqing, was completed in 2007.
In addition to dams already built in the Yangtze basin, several large dams are planned and these may present further problems for the native fauna.
Yangtze sturgeon use seasonal changes in the flow of the river to signal when is it time to migrate.
In addition to the very large and exceptionally rare Yangtze giant softshell turtle, several smaller turtle species are found in the Yangtze basin, its delta and valleys.
North Chinese people were active there from the Bronze Age.
The headwaters of the Yangtze are situated at an elevation of about .
The Sino-French Wars of the 1880s emerged with the Battle of Shipu having French cruisers in the lower Yangtze.
A high percentage of these are seriously threatened by human activities.
It was built after the Sino-Soviet Split and did not receive foreign assistance.
Most of the company's ships were seized by Japan in 1941 and services did not resume until 1946.
The British Royal Navy had a series of Insect class gunboats which patrolled between Chungking and Shanghai.
Meanwhile, the relatively dense population and rich cities along the river make the floods more deadly and costly.
Due to commercial use of the river, tourism, and pollution, the Yangtze is home to several seriously threatened species of large animals (in addition to fish): the finless porpoise, baiji (Yangtze River dolphin), Chinese alligator, Yangtze giant softshell turtle and Chinese giant salamander.
In the lower Yangtze, two Yue tribes, the ''Gouwu'' in southern Jiangsu and the ''Yuyue'' in northern Zhejiang, display increasing Zhou (i.e., North Chinese) influence from the 9th century&nbsp;BC.
Steamers came late to the upper river, the section stretching from Yichang to Chongqing.
Very common in 18th- and 19th-century sources, the name fell out of favor due to growing awareness of its lack of ''any'' connection to the river's Chinese names and to the irony of its application to such a muddy waterway.
British warships, constructed using such innovations as steam power combined with sail and the use of iron in shipbuilding, wreaked havoc on coastal towns; such ships (like the ''Nemesis'') were not only virtually indestructible but also highly mobile and able to support a gun platform with very heavy guns.
Whether native or nativizing, the Yangtze states held their own against the northern Chinese homeland: some lists credit them with three of the Spring and Autumn Period's Five Hegemons and one of the Warring States' Four Lords.
Chumar is Tibetan for the "Red River."
The largest of these lakes is Dongting Lake, which is located on the border of Hunan and Hubei provinces, and is the outlet for most of the rivers in Hunan.
Three exceptions are the semi-aquatic Eurasian otter, water deer and Père David's deer.
Cruisers and destroyers and Fly class vessels also patrolled.
As the kingdoms of Wu and Yue, they were famed as fishers, shipwrights, and sword-smiths.
From antiquity until the Ming Dynasty, this stretch of the river was believed to be a tributary of the Yangtze while the Min River was thought to be the main course of the river above Yibin.
Other Chinese vessels came onto the run and by 1915, foreign ships expressed their interest too.
Until 1881, the India and China coastal and river services were operated by several companies.
One of the Standard Oil captains who survived this attack had served on the Upper River for 14 years.
Yichang, or Ichang,  from the sea, is the head of navigation for river steamers; oceangoing vessels may navigate the river to Hankow, a distance of almost 1,000&nbsp;km (almost 600&nbsp;mi) from the sea.
He also wrote ''Handbook for the Guidance of Shipmasters on the Ichang-Chungking Section of the Yangtze River'', a detailed and illustrated account of the Upper Yangtze's currents, rocks, and other hazards with navigational instruction.
File:Yichang Yangtze Highway Bridge.JPG|The Yichang Yangtze Highway Bridge, a suspension bridge near the Gezhouba Dam lock, was completed in 1996.
Later on it was the earliest part of the Yangtze valley to be integrated into the North Chinese cultural sphere.
The Yangtze River flows through a wide array of ecosystems and is habitat to several endemic and endangered species including the Chinese alligator, the finless porpoise, the Chinese paddlefish, the (possibly extinct) Yangtze River dolphin or ''baiji'', and the Yangtze sturgeon.
With the Treaty Ports, the European powers and Japan were allowed to sail navy ships into China's waters.
Probably the most curious incident involved HMS Amethyst in 1949 during the Chinese Civil War between Kuomintang and People's Liberation Army forces; and led to the award of the Dickin Medal to the ship's cat Simon.
Plant trained hundreds of Chinese and foreign pilots and issued licenses and worked with the Chinese government to make the river safer in 1917 by removing some of the most difficult obstacles and threats with explosives.
She then operated along the north and central China coast and on the lower Yangtze until June 1892.
Beginning in the 1950s dams and thousands of kilometres of dykes were built for flood control, land reclamation, irrigation and for the control of diseases vectors such as blood flukes that caused Schistosomiasis.
Bridge-building slowed in the 1980s before resuming in the 1990s and accelerating in the first decade of the 21st century.
The Central Yangtze valley was home to sophisticated Neolithic Cultures.
The battle was a Song victory that halted the invasion by the Jin.
This newt has not been seen since 1979 and is considered extinct.
The rapid pace of bridge construction has continued.
In 1908, local Sichuan merchants and their government partnered with Captain Plant to form Sichuan Steam Navigation Company becoming the first successful service between Yichang and Chongqing.
The new approach also benefitted the farmers economically.
In the Hubei Province, the river is also called the '''''Jing Jiang''''' (, p&nbsp;''Jīngjiāng'') or the "Jing River" after Jingzhou.
No other order has more than four species in the river and one endemic.
Europeans who arrived in the Yangtze Delta region applied this local name to the Å river.
While in the Sichuan basin, it receives several mighty tributaries, increasing its water volume significantly.
Junk travel accomplished the upriver feat by employing 70 - 80 trackers, men hitched to hawsers who physically pulled ships upriver through some of the most risky and deadly sections of the three gorges.
Many are only found in some section of the river basin and especially the upper reach (above Yichang, but below the headwaters in the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau) is rich with 279 species, including 147 Yangtze endemics and 97 strict endemics (found only in this part of the basin).
'''''Chang Jiang''''' (长江/長江) is the modern Chinese name for the lower  of the Yangtze from its confluence with the Min River at Yibin in Sichuan Province to the river mouth at Shanghai.
The second bridge across the river was built a single-track railway bridge built upstream in Chongqing in 1959.
In Old Chinese, this stretch of the Yangtze was simply called ''Jiang/Kiang''   , a character of phono-semantic compound origin, combining the water radical  with the homophone  (now pronounced ''gōng'', but ''*kˤoŋ'' in Old Chinese).
In 2010, the Yangtze population of finless porpoise was 1000 individuals.
The rainy season in China is May and June in areas south of Yangtze River, and July and August in areas north of it.
In the process, it changed its name to Chu.
These animals numbers went into freefall from the combined effects of accidental catches during fishing, river traffic, habitat loss and pollution.
The river originates from several tributaries, two of which have claims to be the source.
Robert Dollar was a later shipping magnate, who became enormously influential moving Californian and Canadian lumber to the Chinese and Japanese market.
The Dangqu River (, p&nbsp;''Dāngqū'') is the actual geographic headwater of the Yangtze.
From June to September 1954, the Yangtze River Floods were a series of catastrophic floodings that occurred mostly in Hubei Province.
Early in the Qing dynasty, the region called Jiangnan (that includes the southern part of Jiangsu, the northern part of Zhejiang, and the southeastern part of Anhui) provided ⅓–½ of the nation's revenues.
Due to unusually high volume of precipitation as well as an extraordinarily long rainy season in the middle stretch of the Yangtze River late in the spring of 1954, the river started to rise above its usual level in around late June.
Reconnecting the lakes improved water quality and fish were able to migrate from the river into the lake, replenishing their numbers and genetic stock.
In June 1900, Plant was the first to successfully pilot a merchant steamer on the Upper Yangtze from Yichang to Chongqing.
Furthermore, the natural flow of migratory fish was obstructed and biodiversity across the whole basin decreased dramatically.
They argue that the Three Gorges dam will actually make flooding in the upper reaches worse and have little or no impact on floods which originate in the lower reaches.
In 1898, Little persuaded Captain Samuel Cornell Plant to come out to China to lend his expertise.
The first ''USS Monocacy'', a sidewheel gunboat, began charting the Yangtze River in 1871.
The event was considered the worst Northern China flood in 40 years.
File:Xiling Gorge along Yangtze.jpg|Xiling Gorge, one of the Three Gorges
The '''Tongtian River''' (, lit.&nbsp;"River Passing Through Heaven") describes the  section from Yushu up to the confluence with the Dangqu River.
In the first half of the 20th century, rail passengers from Beijing to Guangzhou and Shanghai had to disembark, respectively, at Hanyang and Pukou, and cross the river by steam ferry before resuming journeys by train from Wuchang or Nanjing West.
A second bridge in Wuhan was completed in 1995.
Qin was able to unite China by first subduing Ba and Shu on the upper Yangtze in modern Sichuan, giving them a strong base to attack Chu's settlements along the river.
In 2002 a pilot program was initiated to reconnect lakes to the Yangtze with the objective to increase biodiversity and to alleviate flooding.
Thus the lakes partially or completely dried up.
The warship engaged in continuous patrol operations between Ichang and Chungking throughout 1923, supplying armed guards to merchant ships, and protecting Americans at Chungking while that city was under siege by a warlord army.
At Wuhan, it receives its biggest tributary, the Han River, bringing water from its northern basin as far as Shaanxi.
Chinese coastal trade started shortly after and in 1883 a regular service to Australia was initiated.
In Anhui Province, the river takes on the local name '''''Wan Jiang''''' after the shorthand name for Anhui, wan (皖).
The less well known ancient Lingqu Canal, connecting the upper Xiang River with the headwaters of the Guijiang, allowed a direct water connection from the Yangtze Basin to the Pearl River Delta.
The name '''Blue River''' began to be applied in the 18th century, apparently owing to a former name of the Dam Chu or Min and to analogy with the Yellow River, but it was frequently explained in early English references as a 'translation' of ''Jiang'', ''Jiangkou'', or ''Yangzijiang''.
Some sections of the river are now protected as nature reserves.
It was the first bridge across the Yangtze River.
These include the Chinese box turtle, yellow-headed box turtle, Pan's box turtle, Yunnan box turtle, yellow pond turtle, Chinese pond turtle, Chinese stripe-necked turtle and Chinese softshell turtle, which all are considered threatened.
The largest shipping companies in service, Butterfield & Swire, Jardine Matheson, Standard Oil, Mackenzie & Co., Asiatic Petroleum, Robert Dollar, China Merchants S.N.
There were gates between the lakes that could be opened during floods.
In 1919, she was placed on the disposal list at Shanghai following a collision with a Yangtze River steamer that damaged her bow.
As a result, populations of 47 threatened species increased, including the critically endangered Yangtze alligator.
The river is the longest in the world to flow entirely within one country.
''Chang Jiang'' literally means the "Long River."
This occurred notably during the Southern and Northern Dynasties, and the Southern Song.
Only a few large lakes, such as Poyang Lake and Dongting Lake, remained connected to the Yangtze.
Various sections of ''Chang Jiang'' have local names.
In an attempt of minimizing the effect of the dams, the Three Gorges Dam has released water to mimic the (pre-dam) natural flooding and trigger the breeding of carp species downstream.
Dams present another serious problem, as several species in the river perform breeding migrations and most of these are non-jumpers, meaning that normal fish ladders designed for salmon are ineffective.
From June to September 1891, anti-foreign riots up the Yangtze forced the warship to make an extended voyage as far as Hankow, 600 miles upriver.
By the Han Dynasty, ''Jiang'' had come to mean ''any'' river in Chinese, and this river was distinguished as the "Great River"  (''Dàjiāng'').
Prior to this, its headwaters drained south into the Gulf of Tonkin along or near the course of the present Red River.
Among these are two that are considered entirely extinct (''Anabarilius liui liui'' and ''Atrilinea macrolepis''), two that are extinct in the wild (''Anabarilius polylepis'' and ''Schizothorax parvus'') and five that er critically endangered (Chinese paddlefish, ''Euchiloglanis kishinouyei'', ''Megalobrama elongata'', ''Schizothorax longibarbus'' and ''Leiocassis longibarbus'').
The gunboat was also administratively assigned to the Asiatic Fleet that year, which had been reestablished by the Navy to better protect, in the words of the Bureau of Navigation, "American interests in the Orient."
The Three Gorges Dam on the Yangtze River is the largest hydro-electric power station in the world.
This is the only other place besides the United States that is native to an alligator and paddlefish species.
''Shutung'' was commandeered by warlords and ''Shuhun'' was brought down river to Shanghai for safekeeping.
The floods caused $26 billion in damages.
The Grand Canal connects the lower Yangtze with the major cities of the Jiangnan region south of the river (Wuxi, Suzhou, Hangzhou) and with northern China (all the way from Yangzhou to Beijing).
Between 1918 -1919, Sichuan warlord violence and escalating civil war put Sichuan Steam Navigational Company out of business.
In 2007, a large, white animal was sighted and photographed in the lower Yangtze and was tentatively presumed to be a ''baiji''.
However, farmers and settlements encroached on the land next to the lakes although it was forbidden to settle there.
From Yibin to Yichang, the river through Sichuan and Chongqing Municipality is also known as the '''''Chuan Jiang''''' (, p&nbsp;''Chuānjiāng'') or "Sichuan River."
In 473&nbsp;BC, King Goujian of Yue fully annexed Wu and moved his court to its eponymous capital at modern Suzhou.
In 333&nbsp;BC, Chu finally united the lower Yangtze by annexing Yue, whose royal family was said to have fled south and established the Minyue kingdom in Fujian.
With Plant's design input, Little had ''SS Pioneer'' built with Plant in command.
In modern Chinese, Yangtze is still used to refer to the lower part of Chang Jiang from Nanjing to the river mouth.
The name comes from a fabled river in the ''Journey to the West''.
The river is one of the world's busiest waterways.
Many Yangtze fish species have declined drastically and 65 were recognized as threatened in the 2009 Chinese red list.
The Yangtze again flooded in 1935, causing great loss of life.
Many battles took place along the river, the most famous being the Battle of Red Cliffs in 208 AD during the Three Kingdoms period.
For about  inland from its mouth, the river is virtually at sea level.
Chinese companies ran their own steamers, but were second tier to European operations at the time.
The dividing sites of upstream, midstream and downstream are considered to be Yichang and Hukou (Jiujiang) respectively.
The origin of the Yangtze River has been dated by some geologists to about 45 million years ago in the Eocene, but this dating has been disputed.
Human activity has been verified in the Three Gorges area as far back as 27,000 years ago, and by the 5th millennium&nbsp;BC, the lower Yangtze was a major population center occupied by the Hemudu and Majiabang cultures, both among the earliest cultivators of rice.
At the collapse of the Qin Dynasty, these southern commanderies became the independent Nanyue Empire under Zhao Tuo while Chu and Han vied with each other for control of the north.
''Leechuan'' was not designed for cargo or passengers and if Little wanted to take his vision one step further, he required an expert pilot.
Additionally, both the  Yangtze sturgeon and Chinese sturgeon are considered critically endangered by the IUCN.
About  of the total freshwater fisheries in China are in the Yangtze Basin, but a drastic decline in size of several important species has been recorded, as highlighted by data from lakes in the river basin.
(That connection also made it one of the ''Yellow'' River's principal ports between the floods of 1344 and the 1850s, during which time the Yellow River ran well south of Shandong and discharged into the ocean only a few hundred kilometres away from the mouth of the Yangtze.)
It is playing an increasingly crucial role in the river valley's economic growth and has become a vital link for international shipping to the inland provinces.
The remaining are also known from salt or brackish waters, such as the river's estuary or the East China Sea.
Based on studies of sedimentation rates, however, it is unlikely that the present discharge site predates the late Miocene ( Ma).
The Japanese engaged in open war with the Chinese twice, and Russians twice, over conquest of the Chinese Qing Empire—in the First and Second Sino-Japanese War 1895, and 1905; and the Russo-Japanese War of 1904.
The mayor of Wuhan announced that six huge, stagnating urban lakes including the East Lake (Wuhan) would be reconnected at the cost of US$2.3 billion creating China’s largest urban wetland landscape.
A stretch of the upstream Yangtze flowing through deep gorges in western Yunnan is part of the Three Parallel Rivers of Yunnan Protected Areas, a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
The pollution was exacerbated by the discharge of waste from pig farms as well as of untreated industrial and municipal sewage.
Cargo transportation reached 795 million tons in 2005.
Prior to the Song dynasty, other names were used including, for example Lújiāng (瀘江) from the Three Kingdoms period.
Following an anti-foreign riots in Changsha in April 1910, which destroyed a number of missions and merchant warehouses, Samar sailed up the Yangtze River to Hankow and then Changsa to show the flag and help restore order.
River cruises several days long, especially through the beautiful and scenic Three Gorges area, are becoming popular as the tourism industry grows in China.
The name likely comes from an ancient ferry crossing called Yangzi or Yangzijin ( or , p&nbsp;''Yángzǐ'' or ''Yángzǐjīn'').
It enters the basin of Sichuan at Yibin.
After entering Hubei, the Yangtze receives water from a number of lakes.
Hanyu Pinyin was adopted by the PRC's First Congress in 1958, but it was not widely employed in English outside mainland China prior to the normalization of diplomatic relations between the United States and the PRC in 1979; since that time, the spelling '''Yangzi''' has also been used.
In 1842, the Qing authorities sued for peace, which concluded with the Treaty of Nanjing signed on a gunboat in the river, negotiated in August of that year and ratified in 1843.
Politically, Nanjing was the capital of China several times, although most of the time its territory only covered the southeastern part of China, such as the Wu kingdom in the Three Kingdoms period, the Eastern Jin Dynasty, and during the Southern and Northern Dynasties and Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms periods.
The most recent major floods were the 1998 Yangtze River Floods, but more disastrous were the 1954 Yangtze River Floods, killing around 30,000 people.
Though recently relocated to higher ground ahead of the Three Gorges Dam, the monument still stands overlooking the Upper Yangtze River near Yichang, a rare collective tribute to a westerner in China.
Gold prospecting along the Jinsha continued to this day.
The Jiujiang Yangtze River Bridge was built in 1992 as part of the Beijing-Jiujiang Railway.
Some experts recommend a 10-year fishing moratorium to allow the remaining populations to recover.
But  summer was better navigationally and the three gorges, described as an "150-mile passage which is like the narrow throat of an hourglass", posed hazardous threats of crosscurrents, whirlpools and eddies, creating significant challenges to steamship efforts.
The Yangtze River is important to the cultural origins of southern China.
In Tibetan, the Tuotuo headwaters are the ''Machu'' (, w&nbsp;''rMa-chu'', literally&nbsp;"Red River" or (perhaps "Wound-like Red River?")).
In mid-2014 the Chinese government announced it was building a multi-tier transport network, comprising railways, roads and airports, to create a new economic belt alongside the river.
It is a commercially important species in its native range where it is farmed, but the Chinese mitten crab has also been spread to Europe and North America where considered invasive.
In 1895, the Treaty of Shimonoseki provided a provision which opened Chongqing fully to foreign trade.
The prosperous Yangtze River Delta generates as much as 20% of the PRC's GDP.
Although the mouth of the Yellow River has fluctuated widely north and south of the Shandong peninsula within the historical record, the Yangtze has remained largely static.
The epithet  (of which the modern, simplified version ),  means "long", was first formally applied to the river during the Six Dynasties period.
In 1909 the gunboat ''USS Samar'' changed station to Shanghai, where she regularly patrolled the lower Yangtze River up to Nanking and Wuhu.
It has declined drastically due to hunting (it is considered a delicacy), habitat loss and pollution.
The PRC government has recognized the source of the Tuotuo tributary at the base of a glacier lying on the west of Geladandong Mountain in the Dangla Mountain Range on the eastern part of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau.
The Yangtze is the sixth-largest river by discharge volume in the world.
By 1800, English cartographers such as Aaron Arrowsmith had adopted the French style of the name as '''Yang-tse''' or '''Yang-tse&nbsp;Kiang'''.
Other species that support important fisheries include northern snakehead, Chinese perch, ''Takifugu'' pufferfish (mainly in the lowermost sections) and predatory carp.
A full international fleet featured on Chinese waters: Austro-Hungarian, Portuguese, Italian, Russian and German navy ships came to Shanghai and the treaty ports.
Commercial firms, Robert Dollar Company, Jardine Matheson, Butterfield and Swire and Standard Oil added their own steamers on the river between 1917 - 1919.
Intensive farming of fish in ponds spread using one type of carp who thrived in eutrophic water conditions and who feeds on algae, causing widespread pollution.
The erection of the Three Gorges Dam has created an impassable "iron barrier" that has led to a great reduction in the biodiversity of the river.
Traditional accounts credit these changes to northern refugees (Taibo and Zhongyong in Wu and Wuyi in Yue) who assumed power over the local tribes, though these are generally assumed to be myths invented to legitimate them to other Zhou rulers.
The polluted Dian Lake, which is part of the upper Yangtze watershed (via Pudu River), is home to several highly threatened fish, but was also home to the Yunnan lake newt.
