While the city had few human casualties, three quarters of Yangon's industrial infrastructure was destroyed or damaged, with losses estimated at US$800 million.
Until the mid-1990s, Yangon remained largely constrained to its traditional peninsula setting between the Bago, Yangon and Hlaing rivers.
As the city has the best sporting facilities in the country, most national-level annual sporting tournaments such as track and field, football, volleyball, tennis and swimming are held in Yangon.
International text messaging and voice messaging was permitted only in August 2008.
Myanmar Radio National Service is the national radio service and broadcasts mostly in Burmese (and in English during specific times.)
The most famous of all, the Shwedagon Pagoda Festival in March, attracts thousands of pilgrims from around the country.
The city hosted the 1961 and 1969 South East Asian Games.
This order is repeated from west to east.
Teams such as Manchester United, Liverpool, Chelsea, Real Madrid, Barcelona, Bayern Munich and Manchester City are among the favorite European teams among the Yangonites.
Television broadcasting is off limits to the private sector.
Although most apartment buildings were built only within the last 20 years, they look much older and rundown due to shoddy construction and lack of proper maintenance.
West of the pagoda towards the former Hluttaw (Parliament) complex is the 130-acre (53-ha) People's Square and Park, (the former parading ground on important national days when Yangon was the capital.)
As a result, Burmese drivers have to rely on their passengers when passing other cars.
Due to the problems of high inflation, the lack of high denomination notes, and the fact that many of the population do not have access to checks, or credit or debit cards, it is common to see citizens carrying a considerable amount of cash.
The apartments are usually eight stories high (including the ground floor) mainly because city regulations, until February 2008, required that all buildings higher than  or eight stories install elevators.
The general state of health care in Yangon is poor.
Pop culture oriented Yangon City FM and Mandalay City FM radio stations specialize in Burmese and English pop music, entertainment programs, live celebrity interviews, etc.
The city was later developed by the Public Works Department and Bengal Corps of Engineers.
Yangon is located in Lower Burma (Myanmar) at the convergence of the Yangon and Bago Rivers about 30&nbsp;km(19&nbsp;mi) away from the Gulf of Martaban at 16°48' North, 96°09' East (16.8, 96.15).
In November 2005, the military government designated Naypyidaw,  north of Yangon, as the new administrative capital, and subsequently moved much of the government to the newly developed city.
The popularity of the commuter line has jumped since the government reduced petrol subsidies in August 2007.
People moved in, but little of the city moved out.
literature, music, film, etc.
Found throughout the city in various forms, eight-story apartment buildings provide relatively inexpensive housing for many Yangonites.
The manufacturing sector suffers from both structural problems (e.g.
Newer satellite towns such as North Dagon and South Dagon are still essentially slums in a grid layout.
The University of Medicine 1, University of Medicine 2, Yangon Technological University, University of Computer Studies and Myanmar Maritime University are the most selective in the country.
Students from around the country still have to come to study in Yangon as some subjects are offered only at its universities.
Even in Yangon, which has the best infrastructure, the estimated telephone penetration rate was only 6% at the end of 2004, and the official waiting time for a telephone line was 3.6 years.
The average person stays close to his or her neighbourhood haunts.
Highway buses to other cities depart from Dagon Ayeyar Highway Bus Terminal for Irrawaddy delta region and Aung Mingala Highway Bus Terminal for other parts of the country.
Yangon has a growing population of skateboarders, as documented in the films Altered Focus: Burma and Youth of Yangon.
Yangon Circular Railway runs a  39-station commuter rail network that connects Yangon's satellite towns.
Access to foreign media is extremely difficult.
The city features a lengthy wet season from May through October where a substantial amount of rainfall is received; and a dry season from November through April, where little rainfall is seen.
After independence, many South Asians and Anglo-Burmese left.
Yangon () is a combination of the two words ''yan'' () and ''koun'' (), which mean "enemies" and "run out of", respectively.
Yangon has a  road network of all types (tar, concrete and dirt) in March 2011.
File:Thingyan, Yangon, Myanmar 1.jpg|Thingyan, Burmese New Year
In May 2008, Cyclone Nargis hit Yangon.
Hlawga National Park and Allied War Memorial at the outskirts of the city are popular day-trip destinations with the well-to-do and tourists.
Other options include karaoke bars and pub restaurants in Yangon Chinatown.
The city alone represents about one fifth of the national economy.
Downtown Yangon is still mainly made up of decaying colonial buildings.
Until April 2009, the now defunct Myanmar Premier League, consisted of 16 Yangon-based clubs, played all its matches in Yangon stadiums, and attracted little interest from the general public or commercial success despite the enormous popularity of football in Burma.
Internet access in Yangon, which has the best telecommunication infrastructure in the country, is slow and erratic at best, and the Burmese government implements one of the world's most restrictive regimes of Internet control.
Its standard time zone is UTC/GMT +6:30 hours.
Two grounds were used to host these matches, the BAA Ground and the Gymkhana Ground.
The construction industry has been negatively affected by the move of state apparatus and civil servants to Naypyidaw, new regulations introduced in August 2009 requiring builders to provide at least 12 parking spaces in every new high-rise building, and the general poor business climate.
Most downtown buildings from this era are four-story mix-use (residential and commercial) buildings with  ceilings, allowing for the construction of mezzanines.
Many more South Asians were forced to leave during the 1960s by Ne Win's xenophobic government.
File:Yangon Bus.JPG|Bus(now new buses)
Although Yangon's infrastructure is undeveloped compared to that of other major cities in southeast Asia, it now has the largest number of colonial buildings in the region.
The pub scene in larger hotels is more or less the same as elsewhere in Asia.
# of public hospitals
Nevertheless, sizable South Asian and Chinese communities still exist in Yangon.
The British also established hospitals including Rangoon General Hospital and colleges including Rangoon University.
As part of an urban development strategy, a hotel zone has been planned in Yangon's outskirts, encompassing government- and military-owned land in Mingaladon, Hlegu and Htaukkyant Townships.
Many of the roads are in poor condition and not wide enough to accommodate an increasing number of cars.
Yangon was the centre of major anti-government protests in 1974, 1988 and 2007.
Yangon has become much more indigenous Burmese in its ethnic make-up since independence.
Yangon became the capital of all British Burma after the British had captured Upper Burma in the Third Anglo-Burmese War of 1885.
Chronic power shortages limit the factories' operating hours between 8&nbsp;am and 6&nbsp;pm.
Tourism represents a major source of foreign currency for the city although by south-east Asian standards the actual number of foreign visitors to Yangon has always been quite low—about 250,000 before the Saffron Revolution in September 2007.
While many students in poor districts fail to reach high school, a handful of Yangon high schools in wealthier districts like Dagon 1, Sanchaung 2, Kamayut 2, Bahan 2, Latha 2, and TTC provide the majority of students admitted to the most selective universities in the country, highlighting the extreme shallowness of talent pool in the country.
File:High Court, Yangon, Myanmar.jpg|Yangon High Court
All buses and 80% of the taxis in Yangon run on compressed natural gas (CNG), following the 2005 government decree to save money on imported petroleum.
Yangon is Burma's main domestic and international hub for air, rail, and ground transportation.
Immigrants have founded their regional associations (such as Mandalay Association, Mawlamyaing Association, etc.)
While Yangon University remains the best known (its main campus is a part of popular Burmese culture e.g.
The city's population grew sharply after 1948 as many people (mainly, the indigenous Burmese) from other parts of the country moved into the newly built satellite towns of North Okkalapa, South Okkalapa, and Thaketa in the 1950s and East Dagon, North Dagon and South Dagon in the 1990s.
These matches mark the only time Burma and Rangoon Gymkhana have appeared in first-class cricket, and the only time first-class cricket has been played in Burma.
Yangon is also the place where the British sent Bahadur Shah II, the last Mughal emperor, to live after the Indian Rebellion of 1857.
However, after years of underinvestment, Yangon's modest hotel infrastructure—only 3000 of the total 8000 hotel rooms in Yangon are "suitable for tourists"—is already bursting at seams, and will need to be expanded to handle additional visitors.
(The changes have not been accepted by many Burmese who consider the junta unfit to make such changes, nor by many publications, news bureaux including, most notably, the BBC and foreign nations including the United Kingdom and United States.)
The price of a GSM mobile phone was about K1.1 million in August 2008.
Based on the design by army engineer Lt. Alexander Fraser, the British constructed a new city on a grid plan on delta land, bounded to the east by the Pazundaung Creek and to the south and west by the Yangon River.
The Anglo-Burmese have effectively disappeared, having left the country or intermarried with other Burmese groups.
It remains to be seen whether the Myanmar National League, the country's first professional football league, and its Yangon-based club Yangon United FC will attract a sufficient following in the country's most important media market.
New radio channels such as Shwe FM and Pyinsawaddy FM can also be tuned with the city area.
Major building programs have resulted in six new bridges and five new highways linking the city to its industrial back country.
Yangon is the country's hub for the movie, music, advertising, newspaper and book publishing industries.
The recent improvement in the country's political climate has attracted an increasing number of businessmen and tourists.
Yangon's museums are the domain of tourists and rarely visited by the locals.
The Yangon Heritage Trust, an NGO started by Thant Myint-U, aims to create heritage areas in Downtown, and attract investors to renovate buildings for commercial use.
All media content must first be approved by the government's media censor board, Press Scrutiny and Registration Division.
Over twenty special interest journals and magazines covering sports, fashion, finance, crime, literature (but never politics) vie for the readership of the general populace.
The roads running parallel west to east were the Strand Road, Merchant Road, Maha Bandula (née Dalhousie) Road, Anawrahta (Fraser) Road, and Bogyoke Aung San (Montgomerie) Road.
The airport currently has two main international terminals, known as T1 and T2, and a domestic terminal.
Many colonial-period buildings were demolished to make way for high-rise hotels, office buildings, and shopping malls, leading the city government to place about 200 notable colonial-period buildings under the Yangon City Heritage List in 1996.
Other special interest channels are MWD-1 and MWD-2, MRTV-3, the English-language channel that targets overseas audiences via satellite and via Internet, MRTV-4 and Channel 7 are with a focus on non-formal education programs and movies, and Movie 5, a pay-TV channel specializing in broadcasting foreign movies.
In the 1990s, the current military government's more open market policies attracted domestic and foreign investment, bringing a modicum of modernity to the city's infrastructure.
(All population figures are estimates since no official census has been conducted in Burma since 1983.)
Three nationwide strikes against the British Empire in 1920, 1936 and 1938 all began in Yangon.
Semi-governmental ''The Myanmar Times'' weekly, published in Burmese and in English, is mainly geared for Yangon's expatriate community.
Construction is a major source of employment.
Since independence, Yangon has expanded outwards.
But the result is a stretching tail on the city, with the downtown area well removed from its geographic centre.
While Indians formed the slight majority prior to World War II, today, the majority of the population is of Bamar (Burman) descent.
Yangon is the country's main center for trade, industry, real estate, media, entertainment and tourism.
The former British colonial capital has the highest number of colonial period buildings in south-east Asia.
For example, the  Lanmadaw Road is followed by -wide 17th and 18th streets then the medium  Sint-Oh-Dan Road, the 30-foot 19th and 20th streets, followed by another  wide Latha Road, followed again by the two numbered small roads 21st and 22nd streets, and so on.
The 22-mile (35&nbsp;km) Twante Canal was the quickest route from Yangon to the Irrawaddy delta until the 1990s when roads between Yangon and the Irrawaddy Division became usable year round.
The city was retaken by the Allies in May 1945.
Yangon's four main passenger jetties, all located on or near downtown waterfront, mainly serve local ferries across the river to Dala and Thanlyin, and regional ferries to the Irrawaddy delta.
The wealthy bypass the state education system altogether, sending their children to private English language instruction schools such as YIEC or more widely known as ISM, or abroad (typically Singapore or Australia) for university education.
Unlike other major Asian cities, Yangon does not have any skyscrapers.
Watching European football (mostly English Premier League with occasional La Liga, Serie A, Bundesliga) matches while sipping tea is a popular pastime among many Yangonites, rich and poor alike.
The well-to-do tend to visit shopping malls and parks on weekends.
Yangon was founded as ''Dagon'' in the early 11th century () by the Mon, who dominated Lower Burma at that time.
Yangon International Airport, located 12&nbsp;miles (19&nbsp;km) from downtown, is the country's main gateway for domestic and international air travel.
Most television channels in the country are broadcast from Yangon.
Yangon has the best educational facilities and the highest number of qualified teachers in Burma where state spending on education is among the lowest in the world.
Yangon is a member of the Asian Network of Major Cities 21.
The city's area has steadily increased from  in 1901 to  in 1940 to  in 1974, to  in 1985, and to  in 2008.
English is by far the preferred second language of the educated class.
The well-to-do go to private clinics or hospitals like Pun Hlaing International Hospital and Bahosi Medical Clinic.
Soon after Burma's independence in 1948, many colonial names of streets and parks were changed to more nationalistic Burmese names.
Physician-patient ratio
Yangon's property market is the most expensive in the country and beyond the reach of most Yangonites.
The city is Lower Burma's main trading hub for all kinds of merchandise – from basic food stuffs to used cars although commerce continues to be hampered by the city's severely underdeveloped banking industry and communication infrastructure.
Much of the country's legal imports and exports go through Thilawa Port, the largest and busiest port in Burma.
File:Southeast Asia Typical City View.jpg|City View
According to official statistics for FY 2010–2011, the size of the economy of Yangon Region was 8.93 trillion kyats, or 23% of the national GDP.
Although Internet access was available in 42 cities across the country, the number of users outside the two main cities was just over 10,000.
File:Myanmar-Yangon-Independence Monument in Mahabandoola park.jpg|The Independence Monument
Dagon was a small fishing village centred about the Shwedagon Pagoda.
Yangon has three radio stations.
Yangon is the most ethnically diverse city in the country.
"Rangoon" most likely comes from the British imitation of the pronunciation of "Yangon" in the Arakanese language, which is .
Nonetheless many of the country's most selective universities are still in Yangon.
File:Traffic_jam_in_Yangon.jpg| Traffic jam near Yangon port
Although domestic airlines offer service to about twenty domestic locations, most flights are to tourist destinations such as Bagan, Mandalay, Heho and Ngapali, and to the capital Naypyidaw.
After World War I, Yangon became the epicentre of Burmese independence movement, with leftist Rangoon University students leading the way.
Bayinnaung Market is the largest wholesale centre in the country for rice, beans and pulses, and other agricultural commodities.
In July 2008, the two most popular cars in Yangon, 1986/87 Nissan Sunny Super Saloon and 1988 Toyota Corolla SE Limited, cost the equivalent of about US$20,000 and US$29,000 respectively.
Since February 2010, pickup truck bus lines have been forbidden to run in 6 townships of Downtown Yangon, namely Latha, Lanmadaw, Pabedan, Kyauktada, Botahtaung and Pazundaung Townships.
Karens, the Chinese, the Anglo-Burmese and others made up the rest.
Since the late 1980s, however, the city began a rapid spread north to where Yangon International airport now stands.
Credit cards are only rarely used in the city, chiefly in the more lavish hotels.
In 2007, the country of 55 million had only 775,000 phone lines (including 275,000 mobile phones), and 400,000 computers.
Since 1970, cars have been driven on the right side of the road in Burma, as part of a military decree.
The government's decision to move the nation's administrative capital to Naypyidaw has drained an unknown number of civil servants away from Yangon.
Intermarriage between ethnic groups—especially between the Bamar and the Chinese, and the Bamar and other indigenous Burmese—is common.
The narrow streets are numbered; the medium and broad roads are named.
The Saffron Revolution saw mass shootings and the use of crematoria in Yangoon by the Burmese government to erase evidence of their crimes against monks, unarmed protesters, journalists and students.
Nonetheless, car usage in Yangon is on the rise, a sign of rising incomes for some, and already causes much traffic congestion in highway-less Yangon's streets.
Wealthier Yangonites still have access to country's best medical facilities and internationally qualified doctors.
Only Yangon and Mandalay have any sizable number of doctors left as many Burmese doctors have emigrated.
Successive governments have built satellite towns such as Thaketa, North Okkalapa and South Okkalapa in the 1950s to Hlaingthaya, Shwepyitha and South Dagon in the 1980s.
File:Sakura Tower, Yangon, Myanmar.jpg|Sakura Tower
Public hospitals including the flagship Yangon General Hospital lack many of the basic facilities and equipment.
The city was destroyed by a fire in 1841.
Yangon was under Japanese occupation (1942–45), and incurred heavy damage during World War II.
File:Yangon Strand-Road and sunset.jpg|thumb|Yangon Strand-Road and sunset
chronic power shortages) and political problems (e.g.
The pattern of south to north roads is as follows: one broad  wide broad road, two narrow streets, one mid-size street, two more narrow streets, and then another  wide broad road.
While many high-rise residential and commercial buildings have been constructed or renovated throughout downtown and Greater Yangon in the past two decades, most satellite towns that ring the city continue to be deeply impoverished.
Yangon is home to over 20 universities and colleges.
Yangon is the most populous city by far in Burma although estimates of the size of its population vary widely.
Certain foreign newspapers and periodicals such as the ''International Herald Tribune'' and the ''Straits Times'' can be found only in a few (mostly downtown) bookstores.
Some inner city residents were forcibly relocated to new satellite towns.
The U.S. State Department's estimate is probably closer to the real number since the UN number is a straight-line projection, and does not appear to take the expansion of city limits in the past two decades into account.
The 1988 People Power Uprising resulted in the deaths of hundreds, if not thousands of Burmese civilians, many in Yangoon where hundreds of thousands of people flooded into the streets of the then capital city.
Some hotels offer traditional Burmese performing arts shows complete with a traditional Burmese orchestra.
The former High Court, the former Secretariat buildings, the former St. Paul's English High School and the Strand Hotel are excellent examples of the bygone era.
The east-west grid of downtown Yangon was laid out by British military engineers Fraser and Montgomerie after the Second Anglo-Burmese War.
A 2007 estimate by the London-based International Institute for Strategic Studies puts the spending for education at 0.5 percent of the national budget.
File:Basic Education High School No.
In 2011, Yangon had about 300,000 registered motor vehicles in addition to an unknown number of unregistered ones.
Most rent outside downtown and few can afford to rent downtown area apartments.
All three national newspapers – two Burmese language dailies ''Myanma Alin'' () and ''Kyemon'' (), and the English language ''The New Light of Myanmar'' — are published by the government.
(In Yangon parlance, a building with no elevators (lifts) is called an apartment building and one with elevators is called a condominium.
Older satellite towns such as Thaketa, North Okkalapa and South Okkalapa are lined mostly with one to two story detached houses with access to the city's electricity grid.
The 150-acre (61-ha) lake is surrounded by the 110-acre (45-ha) Kandawgyi Nature Park, and the 69.25-acre (28-ha) Yangon Zoological Gardens, which consists of a zoo, an aquarium and an amusement park.
Still, medical malpractice is widespread even in private clinics and hospitals that serve the well-to-do.
According to official statistics, in July 2010, the country had over 400,000 Internet users, with the vast majority hailing from just two cities, Yangon and Mandalay.
During colonial times, cricket was played mostly by British officials in the city.
2 Latha (St. John's Convent School)
2 Latha.JPG|Basic Education High School No.
(The highest denomination of Burmese currency kyat is 10 000 (~US$10.))
Yangon is also home to annual the Myanmar Open golf tournament, and the Myanmar Open tennis tournament.
Illegally imported unregistered cars are cheaper – typically about half the price of registered cars.
A large number of Rakhine and Karen live in the city.
Nearly all print media and industries are based out of Yangon.
At least 14 light industrial zones ring Yangon, directly employing over 150,000 workers in 4,300 factories in early 2010.
Yangon is also home to many pagoda festivals (''paya pwe''), held during dry-season months (November – March).
The wealthy do not rely on domestic hospitals and travel abroad (usually Bangkok or Singapore) for treatment.
It is also translated as "End of Strife".
In 1989, the current military junta changed the city's English name to "Yangon", along with many other changes in English transliteration of Burmese names.
In 2008, Yangon's 2500 factories alone needed about 120 MW of power; yet, the entire city received only about 250 MW of the 530 MW needed.
File:Yangon -- Generators in front of apartment building.JPG|Electric generators in front of an apartment building
By the government's own figures, it spends 849 kyats (US$0.85) per person.
The system is heavily utilized by the local populace, selling about 150,000 tickets daily.
With little or no state support forthcoming, schools have to rely on forced "donations" and various fees from parents for nearly everything – school maintenance to teachers' salaries, forcing many poor students to drop out.
The tallest building in Yangon, Pyay Gardens, is a 25-story condo in the city's north.
The number of visitors dipped even further following the Saffron Revolution and Cyclone Nargis.
In 1996, the Yangon City Development Committee created a Yangon City Heritage List of old buildings and structures in the city that cannot be modified or torn down without approval.
Downtown Yangon is known for its leafy avenues and fin-de-siècle architecture.
Some leave the city on weekends for Chaungtha and Ngwesaung beach resorts in Ayeyarwady Division.
