Arafat originally attempted to obtain a visa to Canada and later Saudi Arabia, but was unsuccessful in both attempts.
When Arafat's death was announced, the Palestinian people went into a state of mourning, with Qur'anic mourning prayers emitted from mosque loudspeakers throughout the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, and tires burned in the streets.
He began subordinating non-governmental organizations that worked in education, health, and social affairs under his authority by replacing their elected leaders and directors with PNA officials loyal to him.
However, his allies–as well as Israeli intelligence–confirm that he urged his men throughout the battle to hold their ground and continue fighting.
Both names are related to Ammar ibn Yasir, one of Muhammad's early companions.
However, in order to avoid a military confrontation with opposition forces, Hussein dismissed several of his anti-PLO cabinet officials, including some of his own family members, and invited Arafat to become Prime Minister of Jordan.
In 1990, Arafat married Suha Tawil, a Palestinian Christian when he was 61 and Suha, 27.
Vladimir Uiba, the head of the Federal Medical and Biological Agency, said that Arafat died of natural causes (without explaining which) and the agency had no plans to conduct further tests.
As Arafat began to develop friendships with Palestinian refugees (some of whom he knew from his Cairo days), he and the others gradually founded the group that became known as Fatah.
In 1959, the group's existence was attested to in the pages of a Palestinian nationalist magazine, ''Filastununa Nida al-Hayat'' (Our Palestine, The Call of Life), which was written and edited by Abu Jihad.
Arafat returned to Lebanon a year after his eviction from Beirut, this time establishing himself in the northern Lebanese city of Tripoli.
He insisted that financial support was imperative to establishing this authority and needed it to secure the acceptance of the agreements by the Palestinians living in those areas.
Although Arafat lived a modest lifestyle, Dennis Ross, former Middle East negotiator for Presidents George H.W.
Arafat was elected chairman on 4 February.
The majority of the Palestinian people view him as a heroic freedom fighter and martyr who symbolized the national aspirations of his people, while most Israelis came to regard him as an unrepentant terrorist.
For example, the DFLP carried out several attacks against the Lebanese Army.
Arafat was buried in a stone, rather than wooden, coffin, and Palestinian spokesman Saeb Erekat said that Arafat would be reburied in East Jerusalem following the establishment of a Palestinian state.
In October and December 2001, suicide bombings by Palestinian militant groups increased and Israeli counter strikes intensified.
Although hesitant at first to take sides in the conflict, Arafat and Fatah played an important role in the Lebanese Civil War.
According to Alan Hart, the Mossad's specialty is poison.
Originally opposed to Israel's existence, he modified his position in 1988 when he accepted UN Security Council Resolution 242.
The first reports of Arafat's failing health by his doctors for what his spokesman said was the flu came on 25 October 2004, after he vomited during a staff meeting.
The agreement called for the implementation of Palestinian self-rule in portions of the West Bank and Gaza Strip over a five-year period, along with an immediate halt to and gradual removal of Israeli settlements in those areas.
Before their marriage, she was working as a secretary for Arafat in Tunis after her mother introduced her to him in France.
Forensic Biologist Nathan Lents of the John Jay College of Criminal Justice, said the report's results are consistent with a possible polonium poisoning, but "There's certainly not a smoking gun here."
The goal of the invasion was to destroy Karameh camp and capture Yasser Arafat in reprisal for the attacks by the PLO against Israeli civilians, which culminated in an Israeli school bus hitting a mine in the Negev.
Arafat refused to resign his post.
Arafat became the President and Prime Minister of the PNA, the Commander of the PLA and the Speaker of the PLC.
Arafat often led these incursions personally.
Arafat's long personal and political survival was taken by most Western commentators as a sign of his mastery of asymmetric warfare and his skill as a tactician, given the extremely dangerous nature of politics of the Middle East and the frequency of assassinations.
In August 2002, the Israeli Military Intelligence Chief alleged that Arafat's personal wealth was in the range of US$1.3 billion.
On 19 September 2002, the IDF largely demolished the compound with armored bulldozers in order to isolate Arafat.
He told President Clinton that, "the Arab leader who would surrender Jerusalem is not born yet."
Some commentators believe his survival was largely due to Israel's fear that he could become a martyr for the Palestinian cause if he were assassinated or even arrested by Israel.
The al-Husseini clan was based in Gaza and is not related to the well-known al-Husayni clan of Jerusalem.
The complex and fragile web of relations between the US, Israel, Saudi Arabia, and other Arab states contributed also to Arafat's longevity as the leader of the Palestinians.
Mahmoud al-Zahar, a Hamas leader in Gaza, stated in September 2010 that Arafat had instructed Hamas to launch what he termed "military operations" against Israel in 2000 when Arafat felt that negotiations with Israel would not succeed.
After returning to the University, Arafat studied civil engineering and served as president of the General Union of Palestinian Students (GUPS) from 1952 to 1956.
Authority over the various fields of rule, including education and culture, social welfare, direct taxation and tourism, would be transferred to the Palestinian interim government.
Since Arafat was raised in Cairo, the tradition of dropping the Mohammed or Ahmad portion of one's first name was common; notable Egyptians such as Anwar Sadat and Hosni Mubarak did so.
Arafat was pronounced dead at 03:30&nbsp;UTC on 11 November 2004 at the age of 75 of what French doctors called a massive hemorrhagic cerebrovascular accident (hemorrhagic stroke).
In early 1949, the war was winding down in Israel's favor, and Arafat returned to Cairo from a lack of logistical support.
When she asked Arafat why he would not stop going, he responded by saying that he wanted to study Jewish mentality.
The Palestinians claimed that the counterfeit money was confiscated from criminal elements.
But others, including Patrice Mangin of the University of Lausanne and ''The New York Times'' disagreed with this claim, insisting that Arafat's record indicated that it was highly unlikely that the cause of his death was AIDS.
At the Munich Olympic Games, Black September kidnapped and killed eleven Israeli athletes.
Also in 1974, the PLO was declared the "sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people" and admitted to full membership of the Arab League at the Rabat Summit.
Some Israeli government officials opined in 2002 that the armed Fatah sub-group al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades commenced attacks towards Israel in order to compete with Hamas.
These groups often bombed non-military targets, such as malls and movie theaters, to increase the psychological damage and civilian casualties.
In 1970, Arafat declared: "Our basic aim is to liberate the land from the Mediterranean Sea to the Jordan River.
In addition, some circles within the US State Department viewed Arafat as an able diplomat and negotiator who could get support from many Arab governments at once.
By 1946 he was an Arab nationalist and began procuring weapons to be smuggled into the former British Mandate of Palestine, for use by irregulars in the Arab Higher Committee and the Army of the Holy War militias.
Also included in the offer was the return of a small number of refugees and compensation for those not allowed to return.
The Swiss experts read the French and Russian reports and explained that the radiologic data measured by the other teams support their conclusions of a probable death by polonium poisoning.
Arafat's full name was Mohammed Abdel Rahman Abdel Raouf Arafat al-Qudwa.
"Fatah" is also a word that was used in early Islamic times to refer to "conquest."
An investigation conducted by the General Accounting Office reported that Arafat and the PLO held over $10 billion in assets even at the time when he was publicly claiming bankruptcy.
Initially, Arafat's medical records were withheld by senior Palestinian officials, and Arafat's wife refused an autopsy.
Arafat remains a controversial figure.
In response, Israel launched Operation Defensive Shield, a major military offensive into major West Bank cities.
Then-Palestinian foreign minister Nabil Shaath had also ruled out poisoning after talks with Arafat's French doctors.
In response, the IDF launched Operation Litani three days later, with the goal of taking control of Southern Lebanon up to the Litani River.
During the 1980s, Arafat received financial assistance from Libya, Iraq and Saudi Arabia, which allowed him to reconstruct the badly damaged PLO.
Following the Suez Crisis in 1956, Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser agreed to allow the United Nations Emergency Force to establish itself in the Sinai Peninsula and Gaza Strip, precipitating the expulsion of all guerrilla or "fedayeen" forces there—including Arafat.
His support from Arab leaders tended to increase whenever he was pressured by Israel; for example, when Israel declared in 2003 it had made the decision, in principle, to remove him from the Israeli-controlled West Bank.
In response to persistent PLO raids against Israeli civilian targets, Israel attacks the town of Karameh, Jordan, the site of a major PLO camp.
According to Said Aburish, the government of Jordan and a number of Fatah commandos informed Arafat that large-scale Israeli military preparations for an attack on the town were underway, prompting fedayeen groups, such as George Habash's newly formed Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) and Nayef Hawatmeh's breakaway organization the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine (DFLP), to withdraw their forces from the town.
The Palestinian revolution's basic concern is the uprooting of the Zionist entity from our land and liberating it."
On 16 April 1988, as the Intifada was raging, Abu Jihad was assassinated in his Tunis household by an Israeli hit squad.
PLO cross-border raids against Israel grew during the late 1970s.
Both parties agreed also on forming a committee that would establish cooperation and coordination dealing with specific economic sectors, including utilities, industry, trade and communication.
A military band played the French and Palestinian national anthems, and a Chopin funeral march.
Arafat's decision also severed relations with Egypt and many of the oil-producing Arab states that supported the US-led coalition.
After the end of hostilities, many Arab states that backed the coalition cut off funds to the PLO and began providing financial support for the organization's rival Hamas and other Islamist groups.
The first stage of the Intifada began following an incident at the Erez checkpoint where four Palestinian residents of the Jabalya refugee camp were killed in a traffic accident involving an Israeli driver.
Israel responded by confiscating large sums of money in house-to-house raids.
Towards the end of the siege, the US and European governments brokered an agreement guaranteeing safe passage for Arafat and the PLO—guarded by a multinational force of eight hundred US Marines supported by the US Navy—to exile in Tunis.
On 2 April 1989, Arafat was elected by the Central Council of the Palestine National Council, the governing body of the PLO, to be the president of the proclaimed State of Palestine.
According to the Swiss expert team (including notably experts in radio-chemistry, radio-physics and legal medicine), on a probability scale ranging from one to six, death by polonium poisoning is around five.
Unlike the Swiss report, the French and Russian reports were not made public, at the time.
Other heads of state took sides against Hussein, among them Muammar Gaddafi, who mocked him and his schizophrenic father King Talal.
It called for a Palestinian national authority over every part of "liberated" Palestinian territory, which refers to areas captured by Arab forces in the 1948 Arab-Israeli War (present-day West Bank, East Jerusalem and Gaza Strip).
It was mainly composed of PLA soldiers and foreign Palestinian volunteers.
French doctors also said that Arafat suffered from a blood condition known as disseminated intravascular coagulation, although it is inconclusive what brought about the condition.
When the Palestinian National Council (PNC) convened in Cairo on 3 February 1969, Yahya Hammuda stepped down from his chairmanship of the PLO.
Arafat refused, citing his belief in the need for a Palestinian state with Palestinian leadership.
During the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, Arafat left the University and, along with other Arabs, sought to enter Palestine to join Arab forces fighting against Israeli troops and the creation of the state of Israel.
This raid was one of several factors that led to the 1967 Six-Day War.
Mohammed Abdel Rahman was his first name, Abdel Raouf was his father's name and Arafat his grandfather's.
Abu Jihad had previously been assigned the responsibility of the Palestinian territories within the PLO command and according to biographer Said Aburish, had "impressive knowledge of local conditions" in the Israeli-occupied territories.
On 6 June 1982, Israel launched an invasion of Lebanon to expel the PLO from southern Lebanon.
The report implicated Arafat in the "planning and execution of terror attacks".
Suha said she regrets the marriage and given the choice again, would not have wed him.
And none of these dealings were made public."
Many in the US also used Arafat's position as a reason to disregard his claims to being a partner for peace.
The PNA also gained control of the West Bank's postal service during this period.
Arafat's father battled in the Egyptian courts for 25 years to claim family land in Egypt as part of his inheritance but was unsuccessful.
In the late 1960s and early 1970s, Fatah faced off with Jordan in a brief civil war.
The head of the investigation stated that "although the money for the portfolio came from public funds like Palestinian taxes, virtually none of it was used for the Palestinian people; it was all controlled by Arafat.
In its conclusions, the team claimed that part of the Palestinian leader's wealth was in a secret portfolio worth close to $1 billion, with investments in companies like a Coca-Cola bottling plant in Ramallah, a Tunisian cell phone company and venture capital funds in the US and the Cayman Islands.
Fatah dedicated itself to the liberation of Palestine by an armed struggle carried out by Palestinians themselves.
Amid the post-war environment, the profiles of Arafat and Fatah were raised by this important turning point, and he came to be regarded as a national hero who dared to confront Israel.
The group's numbers swelled as many young Arabs, including thousands of non-Palestinians, joined the ranks of Fatah.
During the early 1950s, Arafat adopted the name Yasser, and in the early years of Arafat's guerrilla career, he assumed the nom de guerre of Abu Ammar.
They relocated near the town of Jerash, near the border with Syria.
However, in 2003, a team of American accountants—hired by Arafat's own finance ministry—began examining Arafat's finances.
On 26 December 2013, a team of Russian scientists released a report saying they had found no trace of radioactive poisoning—a finding that comes after the French report found traces of the radioactive isotope polonium.
As the Intifada came to a close, new armed Palestinian groups—in particular Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad (PIJ)—began targeting Israeli civilians with the new tactic of suicide bombings, and internal fighting amongst the Palestinians increased dramatically.
Abu Iyad traveled with Arafat to Kuwait in late 1960; Abu Jihad, also working as a teacher, had already been living there since 1959.
Ahmed Qurei—a key Fatah negotiator during the negotiations in Oslo—publicly announced that the PLO was bankrupt.
On 15 September 1970, the PFLP hijacked five planes and landed three of them at Dawson's Field, located  east of Amman.
Arafat had considered Abu Jihad as a PLO counterweight to local Palestinian leadership in the territories, and led a funeral procession for him in Damascus.
According to Salam Fayyad—a former World Bank official whom Arafat appointed Finance Minister of the PNA in 2002—Arafat's commodity monopolies could accurately be seen as gouging his own people, "especially in Gaza which is poorer, which is something that is totally unacceptable and immoral."
When Jordan saw the size of the raiding forces entering the battle it was lead to the assumption that Israel had another goal of capturing Balqa Governorate to create a Golan Heights similar situation.
The primary components of the Christian front were the Phalangists loyal to Bachir Gemayel and the Tigers Militia led by Dany Chamoun, a son of former President Camille Chamoun.
Arafat's first visit to Jerusalem came when his father, unable to raise seven children alone, sent him and his brother Fathi to their mother's family in the Moroccan Quarter of the Old City.
He did not want to alienate them, and sought their undivided support by avoiding ideological alliances.
In July, after the PNA was declared the official government of the Palestinians, the Basic Laws of the Palestinian National Authority was published, in three different versions by the PLO.
Arafat was Amin's best man at his wedding in Uganda in 1975.
This caused discontent among several of the PLO factions; the PFLP, DFLP and other parties formed a breakaway organization, the Rejectionist Front.
However, he and his colleagues were pardoned by President Salah Jadid shortly after the verdict.
After their proclaimed victory in the Battle of Karameh, Fatah and other Palestinian militias began taking control of civil life in Jordan.
In 1985 Arafat narrowly survived an Israeli assassination attempt when Israeli Air Force F-15s bombed his Tunis headquarters as part of Operation Wooden Leg, leaving 73 people dead; Arafat had gone out jogging that morning.
The word ''Intifada'' in Arabic is literally translated as "tremor", however, it is generally defined as an uprising or revolt.
On the same day, Arafat became supreme commander of the PLA.
Arafat became the first representative of a non-governmental organization to address a plenary session of the UN General Assembly.
He established an executive committee or cabinet composed of twenty members.
In 1976, Abu Sa'ed, a Palestinian agent working for the Mossad, was enlisted in a plot to put poison pellets that looked like grains of rice in Arafat's food.
In the same month, Sharon ordered Arafat to be confined to his Mukata'a headquarters in Ramallah, following an attack in the Israeli city of Hadera; US President George W. Bush supported Sharon's action, claiming that Arafat was "an obstacle to the peace."
Arafat proceeded with creating a structure for the PNA.
Aburish writes that it was on Arafat's orders that Fatah remained, and that the Jordanian Army agreed to back them if heavy fighting ensued.
The Palestinian percentage of sovereignty would extend to 90 percent over a ten- to twenty-five-year period.
During his first year as president of the union, the University was renamed Cairo University after a coup was carried out by the Free Officers Movement overthrowing King Farouk I.
In Syria, he managed to recruit members by offering them higher incomes to enable his armed attacks against Israel.
Amnesty International accused Arafat and the PNA leadership for failing to adequately investigate abuses by the PSS (including torture and unlawful killings) of political opponents and dissidents as well as the arrests of human rights activists.
Israel also feared that his burial would strengthen Palestinian claims to East Jerusalem.
Arafat was reluctant to respond with force, but many other Fatah and PLO members felt otherwise.
There they hijacked a bus and sprayed gunfire inside and at passing vehicles, killing thirty-seven civilians.
The LNM was led by Kamal Jumblatt, who had a friendly relationship with Arafat and other PLO leaders.
After Sheikh Taissir Tamimi discovered that Arafat was buried improperly and in a coffin—which is not in accordance with Islamic law—Arafat was reburied on the morning of 13 November at around 3:00&nbsp;am.
He took part in combat in the Gaza area (which was the main battleground of Egyptian forces during the conflict).
We were planted here before the Prophet Abraham came, but it looks like they Israelis don't understand history or geography."
His death, from his wounds, the following month, and the massacre in April of that year of 27 Palestinians and Lebanese travelling on a bus from Sabra and Shatila to the Tel al-Zaatar refugee camp by Phalangist forces, precipitated the Lebanese Civil War.
In 1994 Arafat received the Nobel Peace Prize, together with Yitzhak Rabin and Shimon Peres, for the negotiations at Oslo.
Both would later become Arafat's top aides.
His political rivals, including Islamists and several PLO leftists, often denounced him for being corrupt or too submissive in his concessions to the Israeli government.
His condition deteriorated in the following days.
After the wanted men were handed over the siege was lifted.
However, the relatively high casualties were a considerable surprise for the Israel Defense Forces and was stunning to the Israelis.
In September 2005, an Israeli-declared AIDS expert claimed that Arafat bore all the symptoms of AIDS based on obtained medical records.
The Jordanian government moved to regain control over its territory, and the next day, King Hussein declared martial law.
She was named Zahwa after Arafat's deceased mother.
Arafat claimed in a 1988 interview with ''Time'' that because of his fear of assassination by the Israelis, he never slept in the same place two nights in a row.
Although he dropped most of his inherited names, he retained Arafat due to its significance in Islam.
The documents showed that, in 2001, Arafat personally approved payments to Tanzim militants.
The PFLP and the Japanese Red Army carried out a shooting rampage at the same airport, killing twenty-four civilians.
He became Commander-in-Chief of the Palestinian Revolutionary Forces two years later, and in 1973, became the head of the PLO's political department.
We are not concerned with what took place in June 1967 or in eliminating the consequences of the June war.
At the same time, Nasser contacted Arafat through the former's adviser Mohammed Heikal and Arafat was declared by Nasser to be the "leader of the Palestinians."
The Palestinian Authority and refugee camps in Lebanon declared 40 days of mourning.
According to Abu Iyad, two attempts were made on Arafat's life by the Israeli Mossad and the Military Directorate in 1970.
He was Chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), President of the Palestinian National Authority (PNA), and leader of the Fatah political party and former paramilitary group, which he founded in 1959.
Egypt's top Muslim cleric Sayed Tantawi led mourning prayers preceding the funeral procession.
The Rejectionist Front of the PLO allied itself with Islamists in a common opposition against the agreements.
The battle was covered in detail by ''Time'', and Arafat's face appeared on the cover of the 13 December 1968 issue, bringing his image to the world for the first time.
With mass applause from the Arab world, financial donations increased significantly, and Fatah's weaponry and equipment improved.
Following recognition, Arafat established relationships with a variety of world leaders, including Saddam Hussein and Idi Amin.
A number of sources, including Mohammed Oudeh (''Abu Daoud''), one of the masterminds of the Munich massacre, and Benny Morris, a prominent Israeli historian, have stated that Black September was an armed branch of Fatah used for paramilitary operations.
Beirut was soon besieged and bombarded by the IDF; Arafat declared the city to be the "Hanoi and Stalingrad of the Israeli army."
In return, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, on behalf of Israel, officially recognized the PLO.
In 1994, Arafat moved to Gaza City, which was controlled by the Palestinian National Authority (PNA)—the provisional entity created by the Oslo Accords.
She views her marriage to Arafat as a mistake.
Persistent attempts by the Israeli government to identify another Palestinian leader to represent the Palestinian people failed.
Israel refused Arafat's wish to be buried near the Al-Aqsa Mosque or anywhere in Jerusalem, citing security concerns.
In March 2003, Arafat ceded his post as Prime Minister to Mahmoud Abbas amid pressures by the US.
He issued such a call on 8 May.
He accepted UN Security Council Resolution 242 and Israel's right "to exist in peace and security" and Arafat's statements were greeted with approval by the US administration, which had long insisted on these statements as a necessary starting point for official discussions between the US and the PLO.
At university, he engaged Jews in discussion and read publications by Theodor Herzl and other prominent Zionists.
In 1997, the PLC accused the executive branch of the PNA of financial mismanagement causing the resignation of four members of Arafat's cabinet.
He made this decision without the consent of other leading members of Fatah and the PLO.
Israel assumed that the Jordanian Army would ignore the invasion, but the latter fought alongside the Palestinians and opened heavy fire that inflicted losses upon the Israeli forces.
On 12 October 2013, the British medical journal ''The Lancet'' published a peer-reviewed article by the Swiss experts about the analysis of the 38 samples of Arafat's clothes and belongings and 37 reference samples which were known to be polonium-free, suggesting that Arafat could have died of polonium poisoning.
This engagement marked the first known deployment of suicide bombers by Palestinian forces.
Arafat continued negotiations with Netanyahu's successor, Ehud Barak, at the Camp David 2000 Summit in July 2000.
Bush and Bill Clinton, stated that Arafat's "walking-around money" financed a vast patronage system known as neopatrimonialism.
However, because Hamas, the DFLP and other popular opposition movements chose to boycott the presidential elections, the choices were limited.
Israeli peace activists of Gush Shalom, Knesset members and others went into the Presidential Compound, prepared to serve as a human shield.
Later that year, at a conference in Prague, he donned a solid white keffiyeh–different from the fishnet-patterned one he adopted later in Kuwait, which was to become his emblem.
The killings were internationally condemned.
On 10 November 2007, prior to the third anniversary of Arafat's death, President Mahmoud Abbas unveiled a mausoleum for Arafat near his tomb in commemoration of him.
This was particularly useful during the First Intifada in December 1987, which began as an uprising of Palestinians against the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
In December 1967 Ahmad Shukeiri resigned his post as PLO Chairman.
Some have alleged that Arafat himself was on the battlefield, but the details of his involvement are unclear.
These included the Madrid Conference of 1991, the 1993 Oslo Accords and the 2000 Camp David Summit.
As part of this effort, Gamal Abdel Nasser led the first emergency Arab League summit in Cairo on 21 September.
Arafat had met Abu Iyad while attending Cairo University and Abu Jihad in Gaza.
After the September 2000 outbreak of the Second Intifada, negotiations continued at the Taba summit in January 2001; this time, Ehud Barak pulled out of the talks to campaign in the Israeli elections.
In accordance with the terms of the Oslo agreement, Arafat was required to implement PLO authority in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
Fuad Shubaki, former financial aide to Arafat, told the Israeli security service Shin Bet that Arafat used several million dollars of aid money to buy weapons and support militant groups.
Many primarily Palestinian political parties, including George Habash's Arab Nationalist Movement, Hajj Amin al-Husseini's Arab Higher Committee, the Islamic Liberation Front and several Syrian-backed groups, virtually crumbled after their sponsor governments' defeat.
