Some tribes supplemented this diet with small-scale cultivation of the "three sisters" – maize, squash, and beans – in fertile streambeds.
With the Mohave people's power greatly diminished, Tolkepaya saw that they needed to make new alliances to protect their safety.
On December 28, accompanied by 100 Pima scouts, Captain William Brown led 120 of Crook's men to a siege of the cave.
*'''Guwevkabaya''' (''Kwevkepaya'' - “Southern People”, '''''Southeastern Yavapai''''' or '''''Southern Yavapai''''', often referred to as ''Tonto Apaches'', lived along the Verde River south of the Mazatzal Mountains and the Salt River to the Superstition Mountains and the western Sierra Estrella Mountains, including the southern and western slopes of the Pinal Mountains, the McDowell Mountains, Dripping Springs, the Four Peaks and Mazatzal Mountains in south-western Arizona)
The Yavapai have much in common with their linguistic relatives to the north, the Havasupai and the Hualapai.
Despite the thousands of emigrants passing through their territory, the Yavapai avoided contact with Whites.
The population consist mainly of the Yavbe'/Yavapé Group of Yavapais.
***''Amahiyukpa'' (lived in the mountains west of the Verde River, north of Lime Creek, also known as the McDowell Mountains about twenty miles north-east of Phoenix)
110 Kwevkepaya were trapped in the cave, when Brown ordered the soldiers to fire at the roof of the cave, causing rock fragments and lead shrapnel to rain down on the Guwevkabaya.
The son, Lorenzo, was left for dead but survived, while sisters Olive and Mary Ann were later sold to Mojaves as slaves.
For most of Yavapai history, the family was the focal group, be it the nuclear family, or extended.
Scholars believe this split occurred around 1750 AD.
The last big battle between the Colorado-Gila River alliances took place in August 1857, when about 100 Yavapai, Quechan, and Mohave warriors attacked a settlement of Maricopa near Pima Butte.
De Espejo was disappointed to find only copper.
In 1864, Arizona Territory Governor John Goodwin advised the territorial legislature that all tribes be subdued and sent to reservations.
Therefore, a group of well-armed volunteers were quickly outfitted with King S. Woolsey as their leader.
**Hwaalkamvepaya (along the Southern Highway from Miami, Arizona to Phoenix on to Superior, Arizona)
Likewise the Guwevkabaya shared hunting and gathering grounds east of the Verde River, along Fossil Creek, East Verde River, Salt River and in the Superstition Mountains, Sierra Ancha and Pinaleno Mountains with Southern Tonto Apache and bands of the San Carlos Apache.
But contractors that worked with the government to supply the reservations were disappointed, and petitioned to have the reservation revoked.
*'''The Sunrise Dance Ceremony''' is not an ancient Yavapai ceremony.
To the north and northwest, Wi:pukba and Yavbe' bands had off-and-on relations with the Pai people throughout most of their history.
In 1598, Hopi brought Marcos Farfán de los Godos and his group to the same mines, to their excitement.
Therefore the enemy Navajo to the north called both, the Tonto Apache and their allies, the Yavapai, ''Dilzhʼíʼ dinéʼiʼ'' - “People with high-pitched voices.” The ethnic Europeans referred to the Yavapai and Apache together as ''Tonto'' or ''Tonto Apache.''
They separated into smaller groups at the end of winter, in time for the spring harvest.
According to Mohave elders, the bird songs tell a story.
A medicine man is joined by other tribal members in singing a series of songs, up to 32 which are believed to have first been sung by Changing Woman.
They often acquired human captives in raids, whom they traded as slaves to Spaniards in exchange for European goods.
But in 1976, the tribe rejected the offer by a vote of 61%, claiming that the tribe would be effectively disbanded by the move.
Responding to growth in the Phoenix area, in the early 1970s Arizona officials proposed to build a dam at the point where the Verde and Salt Rivers meet.
The modern Yavapai take part in several dances and singing, such as the Apache Sunrise Dance and the Bird Singing and Dancing of the Mojave people.
Government among the Yavapai tended to be informal.
The Yavapai reservation in Prescott was established in 1935, originally consisting of just  of land formerly occupied by the Fort Whipple Military Reserve.
Most archeologists agree that the Yavapai originated from Patayan groups who migrated east from the Colorado River region to become Upland Yumans.
Modern bird singing and dancing is used for various purposes such as mourning, celebration and social purposes.
In 1910,  was set aside as the Camp Verde Indian Reservation, and in the following decade added  in two parcels, which became the Middle Verde Indian Reservation.
The four groups consisted of different local groups, composed primarily of kinship groups known as clans.
*Yelyuchopa (lived in the Mazatzal Mountains between the territories of the ''Hakayopa'' and ''Hichapulvapa'')
The Yavapai often acquired tattoos, but the Apache seldom used tattoos.
Tourism contributes greatly to the economy of the tribe, due largely to the presence of many preserved sites, including the Montezuma Castle National Monument.
They raised some livestock and planted crops, also adopting some modern tools and weaponry.
They used livestock raiding, either from other tribes such as the Maricopa, or from Spanish settlements to their south, to supplement their economy.
It is related to the myth of the Changing Woman, a powerful figure in Apache culture who is believed to grant longevity.
The Sunrise Dance is a four-day rite-of-transition for young Apache girls, which typically takes place from March through October.
Today, the tribe consists of 159 official members.
According to their creation story, the Yavapai believe that their people originated "in the beginning," or "many years ago," when either a tree, or a maize plant sprouted from the ground in what is now Montezuma Well, bringing the Yavapai into the world.
The hearts of the plant were roasted in stone-lined pits, and could be stored for later use.
***''Walkamepa'' (″Pine Mountains People″, “actual” or “real” Walkamepa, lived in the southern and western Pinal Mountains, called ''Walkame'' - "pine mountains")
They also had different funeral practices.
Today, the tribal community consists of 900 members, 600 of whom live on the reservation and the remanning 300 which live off the reservation.
The headman of each band usually had two names, one from each culture.
In clothing, Yavapai moccasins were rounded, whereas those of the Apaches were shaped with pointed toes.
Agave was the most crucial harvest, as it was the only plant food available from late fall through early spring.
The population of Fort McDowell consists of the Guwevkabaya Yavapai.
Both in the Walkamepa and Wikedjasapa, the following clans were represented and shared mostly overlapping territories:
Despite this, the growing numbers of settlers (very quickly outnumbering Yavapai) began to call for the government to do something about the people occupying the land that they wanted to occupy and exploit themselves.
*'''Yavbe'''' ('''''Northwestern Yavapai''''' or '''''Central Yavapai''''', often referred to as ''Mohave-Apaches (Apache-Mojaves)'', often called ''real Yavapai'', because they were hardly culturally influenced by neighboring peoples, lived from Williamson (Williamson Valley) south of the Bradshaw Mountains (in Yavapai: ''Wikanyacha'' - "rough, black range of rocks") to the Agua Fria River)
The Mountain Spirit dance was a masked dance, which was used for guidance or healing of a sick person.
Most of the people in these mixed groups spoke both languages.
***''Wiikenyachapaya'' (''Wikenichapa'', also known as “Black Mountain or Crown King Band”, lived in the southern Bradshaw Mountains south to Wickenburg area and the middle Agua Fria River)
In episode 8 ("Derailed"), Eva tells Lily the Yavapi hacked up and scalped Eva's parents, and raped her sister then bashed out her brains with rocks, but Eva had the pox and they wouldn't touch her.
In 1851, the Oatman family was ambushed by a group of ''Ɖo:lkabaya'' Yavapai (though many historians argue that it is impossible to know whether or not these were Yavapai, or some other tribe).
During winter months, closed huts (called ''uwas'') would be built of ocotillo branches or other wood and covered with animal skins, grasses, bark, and/or dirt.
Scholars cannot tell from records whether the writers of the time, when using the term Tonto Apache, were referring to Yavapai or Apache, or those mixed bands.
These two reservations were combined in 1937, to form the Camp Verde Yavapai-Apache tribe.
The ''Guwevkabaya'' or ''Southeastern Yavapai'' on Fort McDowell Reservation call themselves ''A'ba:ja'' - ″The People” therefore some anthropologists and linguists believe, that the name ''Apache'' for the various Southern Athabascan peoples derives from the self-designation of the Yavapai.
There were no tribal chiefs, such as ''Chief of the Guwevkabaya'' or ''Chief of the Ɖo:lkabaya.''
An entire night is needed to sing the whole cycle, from sun down to sun up.
In the now infamous Yavapi Indian Strap Match, Hulk Hogan and "Nature Boy" Ric Flair battled for World Championship Wrestling in 2000.
When Kit Carson and Ewing Young led a trapping group through the territory in 1829, the group was "nightly harassed..."  Traps were stolen and some of their horses and mules killed.
Succeeding the tribe's first chief, Sam Jimulla, his wife Viola became the first female chieftess of a North American tribe.
This is partly because most food-providing sites were not large enough to support larger populations.
In 1925, a group of Yavapai from the Fort McDowell Reservation, along with a Maricopa County Sheriff, collected the bones from the cave, and interred them at the Fort McDowell cemetery.
The first recorded contact with Yavapai was made by Antonio de Espejo, who was brought to Jerome Mountain by Hopi guides in 1583, looking for gold.
Some Yavapai men were noted for their wisdom and speaking ability.
In 1956, an additional  were added.
Having nowhere else to go, the besieged gathered around the mouth of the cave, where soldiers (accompanied by Crook) pushed boulders onto them from above, killing 76 of the group.
In 1886, many Yavapai joined in campaigns by the US Army, as scouts, against Geronimo and other Chiricahua Apache.
The Fort McDowell Yavapai Nation is located within Maricopa County approximately 20 miles northeast of Phoenix.
In the Colorado River area, Ɖo:lkabaya built ''Uwađ a'mađva,'' a rectangular hut, that had dirt piled up against its sides for insulation, and a flat roof.
Though Pai and Yavapai both spoke Upland Yuman dialects, and had a common cultural history, each people had tales of a dispute that separated them from each other.
Not long after, in retaliation for the murder of a Pai headman by Americans, a group of Pai attacked some wagon trains, and closed the road between Prescott and Fort Mohave to all traffic.
With the use of guns and other weapons, they began to change methods of warfare, diplomacy, and trade.
Some groups of Tolkepaya began eating fish after contact with their Quechan neighbors.
However, the agreement was not an official treaty, so therefore not legally binding in any way.
The editor of a local newspaper, the ''Arizona Miner'', said "Extermination is our only hope, and the sooner it is accomplished the better."
Today, the reservation spans , in four separate locales.
**Wiikchasapaya (along the Apache Trail from Phoenix to Miami onto the Roosevelt Dam)
The Yavapai defended their lands against Pima incursions, when the Pima would invade to harvest saguaro fruits.
After gold was discovered in California in 1849, more White emigrants passed through Yavapai territory than ever had before.
**Ha'k ahwađbaya / Mađqwadabaya (“People along the red water or Red River, i.e., Colorado River”, were farming along the Colorado River, lived in La Paz and Castle Dome)
The ''Wi:pukba'' (“People from the Foot of the Red Rock”) and ''Guwevkabaya'' lived alongside the Dilzhę́’é Apache  (Tonto Apache) of central and western Arizona.
The Yavapai peoples were not a political or social unit, but rather four separate autonomous groups.
Certain men became recognized leaders based on others choosing to follow them, heed their advice, and support their decisions.
In December 1872, Colonel George Crook used Apache scouts to find a cave in Salt River Canyon that was being used by Guwevkabaya to mount attacks on White settlers.
**Mathaupapaya (inhabited the mountains of Prescott up to Crown King and Bumble Bee, Arizona)
According to Pai myth, the dispute began with a "mudball fight between children."
**Yavapé (claimed land in the upper Verde Valley and surrounding mountains, including the Montezuma National Monument)
Primary animals hunted were deer, rabbit, jackrabbit, quail, and woodrat.
After they killed a group led by John Glanton, who had taken over the crossing, the US government retaliated by burning the fields of the Quechans, and taking control of the crossing.
They also sought shelter in caves or abandoned pueblos to escape the cold.
***''Hakayopa'' (bilingual unit together with the ''Tsé Noltl izhn'', i.e., Mazatzal band of the Southern Tonto Apaches, lived in the Sunflower Valley, south of Mazatzal Peak up in the Mazatzal Mountains and west of Fort Reno in the Tonto Basin in central Arizona)
Another Yavapai band, which no longer exists, was the '''Mađqwadabaya''' or "Desert People."
An estimated 25% of the population died as a result of smallpox in the 17th and 18th centuries, smaller losses than for some tribes, but substantial enough to disrupt their societies.
In the intervening time, through contact with other tribes that had more European contact, the Yavapai began to adopt certain European practices.
Although  culturally, linguistically and ethnically related, they did not identify as Yavapai in a centralized way.
In turn, Ɖo:lkabaya often traded items such as animal skins, baskets, and agave to Quechan groups for food.
In the 1820s, beaver trappers, having depleted the beaver population of the Rocky Mountains, began entering Yavapai territory.
They had to work to cultivate crops, as their land was also less supportive of agriculture.
Ethnological writings describe some major physical differences between Yavapai and Tonto Apache peoples.
After being relocated to the Camp Verde Reservation, on the Verde River near Camp Verde, the Yavapai there began to construct irrigation systems (including a five-mile (8&nbsp;km) long ditch) that functioned well enough to reap sufficient harvests, making the tribe relatively self-sufficient.
***''Ilihasitumapa'' (lived in the northern Pinaleno Mountains)
The Yavapai divided into subsequent four groups:
In a syncretic way, they adopted elements of Christianity.
***''Wiikvteepaya'' (''Wikutepa'', also known as “Granite Peak Band”, lived in the vicinity of present-day Prescott, incorporating Chino Valley, the Sierra Prieta and the northern Bradshaw Mountains)
The masked dancers represented Mountain Spirits, who were believed by Yavapai to dwell in Four Peaks, McDowell Mountains, Red Mountain (near Fort McDowell), Mingus Mountain-(Black Hills) near Camp Verde, and Granite Mountain near present-day Prescott.
The Tonto Apache lived usually east of the Verde River and most of the Yavapai bands lived west of it.
The Apache spoke the Tonto dialect of the Western Apache language (''Ndee biyati' / Nnee biyati'''), and the Yavapai spoke the Yavapai language, a branch of Upland Yuman.
Archeological and linguistic evidence suggests that they split off to develop as the Yavapai somewhere around 1300 AD.
The Wi:pukba tribal areas in the San Francisco Peaks, along the Upper Verde River, Oak Creek Canyon and Fossil Creek, overlapped with those of the Northern Tonto Apache.
In addition, the Europeans often referred to the ''Wi:pukba'' and ''Guwevkabaya'' incorrectly as the ''Yavapai Apache'' or ''Yuma Apache.''
The Yavapai were described as taller, of more muscular build, well-proportioned and thickly featured, while the Tonto Apache were slight and less muscular, smaller of stature and finely featured.
The early Yavapai practiced traditional dances such as the Mountain Spirit Dance, War Dances, Victory Dances and Social Dances.
*'''Bird Singing and Dancing''' Originally part of the culture of the Mojave people of the Colorado River region, bird singing and dancing has been adopted by modern Yavapai culture.
They created different painted designs on faces.
In 1981, after much petitioning of the US government, and a three-day march by approximately 100 Yavapai, the plan to build the dam was withdrawn.
Therefore they formed bilingual mixed-tribal bands.
The story was widely published, and increased White settlers' fears of attack in Arizona.
Instead, they traded her to some Mojave.
Fish and water-borne birds were eschewed by most Yavapai groups.
Warfare was not uncommon in the Yavapai world, and they made changing alliances for security.
(Several Mohave and Quechan families trace their ancestry to Yavapai roots.)
In ''Hell on Wheels'' season 1, Eva tells Elam she was traded, for three blankets and a horse, to the tribe that tattooed her.
Apache and Yavapai often intermarried and adopted elements of each other's cultures; these two tribes reside together on the Camp Verde and Fort McDowell reservations.
**Wiltaaykapaya / Hakeheelapaya (“People of the Two Mountain”, lived in the Harquahala Mountains and Harcuvar Mountains, in the People's Valley, Kirkland Valley, upper reaches of the Hassayampa Creek in south-central Arizona)
These four groups were, for geographical, historical, cultural and familial reasons, in various alliances with neighboring tribes, without regard to the concerns of the adjacent Yavapai groups.
In response, the US Army declared all Indians in lands beyond  east of the Colorado River (the great majority of traditional Yavapai territory) to be "hostile" and "subject to extermination".
A delegation of Yavapai testified to a Congressional Committee against this, and won.
This story tells the creation of the Yuman people and how they came to be.
The same year, a dispatch from the US Army stated "All Apache Yavapai were routinely lumped in with their neighboring Apache Indians in that territory are hostile, and all Apache men large enough to bear arms who may be encountered in Arizona will be slain whenever met, unless they give themselves up as prisoners."
The Yavapai women were described as stouter and having "handsomer" faces than the Yuma, in a historic Smithsonian Institution report.
After overwhelming the Maricopa, the Yavapai left.
Its people are believed to have mixed with the Mojave and Quechan peoples.
Before the 1860s, when settlers began exploring for gold in the area, the Yavapai occupied an area of approximately 20,000&nbsp;mi² (51800&nbsp;km²) bordering the San Francisco Peaks to the north, the Pinaleno Mountains and Mazatzal Mountains to the southeast, and the Colorado River to the west, and almost to the Gila River and the Salt River to the south.
*Onalkeopa (lived in the Mazatzal Mountains between the territories of the ''Hichapulvapa'' and ''Yelyuchopa'', but later moved south into the territory of ''Walkamepa'')
Following the declaration of war against Mexico in May 1845 and especially after the claim by the US of southwest lands under the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo, US military incursions into Yavapai territory greatly increased.
Included in the group were employees of Prescott's US Indian agent John Dunn.
As a result of this and a series of recent killings, a preemptive attack was organized to discourage future depredations.
More than 100 Yavapai died during the winter trek.
In return, the members of the tribe (at the time consisting of 425 members) were offered homes and cash settlements.
Living together in common rancherias, families identified as Apache or Yavapai based on their  “Mother tongue.” Both groups had matrilineal kinship systems, with children considered born into the mother's family and clan, with inheritance and property figured through the maternal line.
What followed was an infamous footnote in Arizona history known today as the Bloody Tanks incident.
Often the Yavapai were mistaken as Apache by American settlers, who referred to them as "Mohave-Apache," "Yuma-Apache," or "Tonto-Apache".
Near Fish Creek, Arizona, was ''Ananyiké'' (Quail's Roost), a Guwevkabaya summer camp that supported upwards of 100 people at a time.
The Yavapai-Apache Nation is the amalgamation of two historically distinct Tribes both of whom occupied the Upper Verde prior to European invasion.
The Yavapi tribe is also the inspiration for the popular professional wrestling strap match in which two wrestlers are bound together at the wrist in the four corners of the battle zone by 20 feet of leather strapation.
Bird singing and dancing does not belong to the Yavapai people as a whole but this practice has been picked up by different tribes of the Yuman family.
Called ''bakwauu'' (″person who talks″), they would settle disputes within the camp and advise others on the selection of campsites, work ethics, and food production.
*'''Ɖo:lkabaya''' ('''''Western Yavapai''''', often referred to as ''Yuma-Apaches'' or ''Apache-Yuma'', because they had close cultural ties to the Yuma and Mohave, lived in the western territory and along the Hassayampa River in southwestern Arizona)
Roys Oatman and his wife were killed, along with four of their children.
*'''Wi:pukba''' (''Wipukepa'', ''Wiipukepaya'' - “People from the Foot of the Red Rock”, '''''Northeastern Yavapai''''', often referred to as ''Mohave-Apaches (Apache-Mojaves)'' or ''Tonto Apaches'', lived in Oak Creek Canyon and along Fossil Creek (in Yavapai: ''ʼHakhavsuwa'') and Rio Verde, Arizona in north-central Arizona)
It supported a prickly pear fruit harvest, and hunting of rabbits and woodrats.
***''Hwaalkyanyanyepaya'' (inhabited the Mesa, where Jerome, Arizona is located, and the adjacent Mingus Mountain)
Farfán referred to the Yavapai as "''cruzados''" because of the crosses painted on their heads.
The Europeans referred to the ''Ɖo:lkabaya,'' the southwestern group of Yavapai, and the ''Hualapai'' (who belonged to the Upland Yuma Peoples), as ''Yuma Apache'' or ''Mohave Apache.''
The Tonto Apache, calling themselves ''Dilzhe'e'', utilized the lands to the north, east and south; while the ''Wi:pukba''' or ''Northeastern Yavapai'' were using country to the north, the west and the south.
Before being confined to reservations, the Yavapai were mainly hunter-gatherers, following an annual round, migrating to different areas to follow the ripening of different edible plants and movement of game.
They wanted to discourage US encroachment on their land.
**Wiipukepaya (formed with the ''Tsé Hichii Indee'' - “Horizontal Red Rock People”, i.e., Oak Creek band of the Northern Tonto Apache a bilingual mixed group, lived in the Redrock Country, harvested corn at Oak Creek and gathering Mesquite in the Verde Valley)
***''Hichapulvapa'' (bilingual unit together with the ''Tsé Noltl izhn'', i.e., Mazatzal band of the Southern Tonto Apaches, lived in the Mazatzal Mountains south from the East Verde River and west of the North Peak to the Mazatzal Peak)
It was the Upper Verde where they overlapped.
They trapped beaver along the Salt, Gila, and Bill Williams rivers.
Their mission was to track the raiding party back to their rancheria.
Outsiders, such as the Spanish, Mexicans and Americans distinguished the peoples primarily by language, but often referred to them as one name.
The dam would have flooded two-thirds of the  reservation.
In winter, camps were formed of larger groups, consisting of several families.
**Hakupakapaya / Hnyoqapaya (lived in the mountains north of the present Congress)
The language includes three dialects, which have been referred to as Western, Northeastern and Southeastern, as well as Prescott, Verde Valley, and Ɖo:lkabaya.
*Matkawatapa (bilingual unit, according to a tradition of mixed marriages of Walkamepa with the Apache of the Sierra Ancha in central Arizona)
They left campsites so similar that scholars are seldom able to distinguish between them.
On November 5, 1871 the ambush of the Wickenburg stage-the Wickenburg massacre in which a driver and five of seven passengers killed led to the relocation of the Yavapai from Prescott to San Carlos Reservation in February 1875.
The Yavapai built brush shelter dwellings called ''Wa'm bu nya:va'' (Wom-boo-nya-va).
These local groups would form bands in times of war, raiding or defense.
The survivors were taken to Camp Grant as prisoners.
The main plant foods gathered were walnuts, saguaro fruits, juniper berries, acorns, sunflower seeds, manzanita berries, hackberries, the bulbs of the Quamash, and the greens of the Lamb's quarters, ''Scrophularia,'' and ''Lupinus'' plants.
In particular, the Ɖo:lkabaya, who lived in lands that were less supportive of food gathering, turned to agriculture more than other Yavapai.
However, exceptions are known.
The power of Changing Woman is transferred to the pubescent girl through songs sung by the Medicine Man.
By the early 1900s, Yavapai were drifting away from the San Carlos Reservation, and were requesting permission to live on the grounds of the original Camp Verde Reservation.
The Yavapai also believe that the Mountain Spirits dwelled in the caves of Montezuma's Castle and Montezuma's Well in the Verde Valley.
The sunrise dance is an ancient practice, unique to the Apache.
In April 1863, Quashackama, a well-known Tolkepaya, met with Arizona Territory superintendent of Indian affairs Charles Poston, along with representatives of the Pimas, Mohaves, Maricopas and Chemehuevis, at Fort Yuma, to sign an agreement intended "to promote the commerce in safety between the before mentioned tribes and the Americans."
Early in January 1864, the Yavapai raided a number of ranches that supplied cattle to the miners in the Prescott and Agua Fria area.
**Matkitwawipa (formed with the ''Tú Dotl`izh Nde'' - “Blue Water People”, i.e., Fossil Creek band of the Northern Tonto Apache a bilingual unit, lived in the upper Verde Valley, along the East Verde River, Fossil Creek, Clear Creek (Arizona), south to Cave Creek in central Arizona)
After this, no other European contact was made for more than 200 years.
The government complied, and in March 1875, the government closed the reservation, and marched the residents  to the San Carlos reservation.
The reservation came into existence when Theodore Roosevelt had Fort McDowell declared a  reservation in 1903, but by 1910, the Office of Indian Affairs was attempting to relocate the residents, to open up the area, and water rights to other interests.
*Iiwilkamepa (lived between the Superstition and Pinal mountains)
The first fighting between US troops and Yavapai came in early 1837, when the Tolkepaya joined with their Quechan neighbors to defend against Major Samuel Heintzelman over a Quechan ferry crossing on the Colorado River.
Men who were noted for their skills as warriors were called ''mastava'' (″not afraid″) or ''bamulva'' (″person who goes forward″).
According to Thomas Sweeney, the Tolkepaya would tell US officers encountered in Quechan territory, that they had a 30-day march to their own territory.
