The yeast lineage originated hundreds of millions of years ago, and 1,500 species are currently identified.
Yeast colonising nectaries of the stinking hellebore have been found to raise the temperature of the flower, which may aid in attracting pollinators by increasing the evaporation of volatile organic compounds.
Most were members of the ''Candida'' genus; the most common species in honey stomachs was ''Dekkera intermedia'' and in flower nectaries, ''Candida blankii''.
Archaeologists digging in Egyptian ruins found early grinding stones and baking chambers for yeast-raised bread, as well as drawings of 4,000-year-old bakeries and breweries.
The bud continues to grow until it separates from the parent cell, forming a new cell.
Brewing yeasts may be classed as "top-cropping" (or "top-fermenting") and "bottom-cropping" (or "bottom-fermenting").
An Indian study of seven bee species and 9 plant species found 45 species from 16 genera colonise the nectaries of flowers and honey stomachs of bees.
An example of bottom-cropping yeast is ''Saccharomyces pastorianus'', formerly known as ''S.&nbsp;carlsbergensis''.
This can cause problems for winemaking but could potentially also be used to advantage by using killer toxin-producing strains to make the wine.
Examples include naturally occurring yeasts on the skins of fruits and berries (such as grapes, apples, or peaches), and exudates from plants (such as plant saps or cacti).
&nbsp;cerevisiae''.
Nutritional yeast is a deactivated yeast, usually ''S.
Rather, a short-term benefit, such as recombinational repair during meiosis, may be the key to the maintenance of sex in ''S.
''Dekkera/Brettanomyces'' is a genus of yeast known for its important role in the production of 'lambic' and specialty sour ales, along with the secondary conditioning of a particular Belgian Trappist beer.
Yeast is used in winemaking, where it converts the sugars present (glucose and fructose) in grape juice (must) into ethanol.
Components other than ethanol are collected in the condensate, including water, esters, and other alcohols, which (in addition to that provided by the oak in which it may be aged) account for the flavour of the beverage.
Yeasts vary in regard to the temperature range in which they grow best.
It comes in the form of flakes, or as a yellow powder similar in texture to cornmeal, and can be found in the bulk aisle of most natural food stores.
Yeasts, with their single-celled growth habit, can be contrasted with molds, which grow hyphae.
An example of a top-cropping yeast is ''Saccharomyces cerevisiae'', sometimes called an "ale yeast".
The haploid fission yeast ''Schizosaccharomyces pombe'' is a facultative sexual microorganism that can undergo mating when nutrients are limiting.
This has occurred out of experimentation, as very little information exists regarding pure culture fermentative capabilities and the aromatic compounds produced by various strains.
The taxonomy of the genus ''Brettanomyces'' has been debated since its early discovery and has seen many reclassifications over the years.
Some probiotic supplements use the yeast ''S.&nbsp;boulardii'' to maintain and restore the natural flora in the gastrointestinal tract.
Yeasts, like all fungi, may have asexual and sexual reproductive cycles.
''Candida glabrata'' is the second most common ''Candida'' pathogen after ''C.&nbsp;albicans'', causing infections of the urogenital tract, and of the bloodstream (candidemia).
Shortly after, the formation of ascospores was observed and the genus ''Dekkera'', which reproduces sexually (teleomorph form), was introduced as part of the taxonomy.
Recent research on eight ''Brettanomyces'' strains available in the brewing industry focused on strain-specific fermentations and identified the major compounds produced during pure culture anaerobic fermentation in wort.
A black yeast has been recorded as a partner in a complex relationship between ants, their mutualistic fungus, a fungal parasite of the fungus and a bacterium that kills the parasite.
Bronze statues are known to be degraded by certain species of yeast.
The wild yeasts are repressed, which ensures a reliable and predictable fermentation.
Baker's yeast is also sold as a fresh yeast compressed into a square "cake".
''Saccharomyces'' yeasts have been genetically engineered to ferment xylose, one of the major fermentable sugars present in cellulosic biomasses, such as agriculture residues, paper wastes, and wood chips.
The current taxonomy includes five species within the genera of ''Dekkera/Brettanomyces''.
The budding yeast ''Saccharomyces cerevisiae'' reproduces by mitosis as diploid cells when nutrients are abundant, but when starved, this yeast undergoes meiosis to form haploid spores.
The most common top-cropping brewer's yeast, ''S.&nbsp;cerevisiae'', is the same species as the common baking yeast.
In general, yeasts are grown in the laboratory on solid growth media or in liquid broths.
The ecological function and biodiversity of yeasts are relatively unknown compared to those of other microorganisms.
The word "yeast" comes from Old English ''gist'', ''gyst'', and from the Indo-European root ''yes-'', meaning "boil", "foam", or "bubble".
It is often used by vegans in place of Parmesan cheese.
Yeasts are able to grow in foods with a low pH (5.0 or lower) and in the presence of sugars, organic acids, and other easily metabolized carbon sources.
Some species can metabolize pentose sugars such as ribose, alcohols, and organic acids.
''Saccharomyces cerevisiae'' has potential to bioremediate toxic pollutants like arsenic from industrial effluent.
The use of potatoes, water from potato boiling, eggs, or sugar in a bread dough accelerates the growth of yeasts.
Yeast autolysates are used in Vegemite and Promite (Australia); Marmite, Bovril and Oxo (the United Kingdom, Republic of Ireland and South Africa); and Cenovis (Switzerland).
''Cryptococcus neoformans'' and ''Cryptococcus gattii'' are significant pathogens of immunocompromised people.
Some species of yeast are opportunistic pathogens that can cause infection in people with compromised immune systems.
Several recipes for homemade CO2 are available, but they are variations of the basic recipe: Baker's yeast, with sugar, baking soda, and water, are added to a plastic bottle.
In 1872, Baron Max de Springer developed a manufacturing process to create granulated yeast, a technique that was used until the first World War.
Beverages such as mead, wine, beer, or distilled spirits all use yeast at some stage of their production.
This will produce CO2 for about two or three weeks; the use of a bubble counter determines production.
Other species of yeasts, such as ''Candida albicans'', are opportunistic pathogens and can cause infections in humans.
'''Yeasts''' are eukaryotic, single-celled microorganisms classified as members of the fungus kingdom.
Most added wine yeasts are strains of ''S.
By fermentation, the yeast species ''Saccharomyces cerevisiae'' converts carbohydrates to carbon dioxide and alcohols&nbsp;– for thousands of years the carbon dioxide has been used in baking and the alcohol in alcoholic beverages.
A few drops of vegetable oil at the start reduces surface tension and speeds the release of CO2.
This ethanol is almost always produced by fermentation&nbsp;– the metabolism of carbohydrates by certain species of yeasts under anaerobic or low-oxygen conditions.
Researchers were doubtful whether yeasts were algae or fungi, but in 1837 Theodor Schwann recognized them as fungi.
Yeasts grow best in a neutral or slightly acidic pH environment.
The pathogenic yeasts of candidiasis in probable descending order of virulence for humans are: ''C.&nbsp;albicans'', ''C.&nbsp;tropicalis'', ''C.&nbsp;stellatoidea'', ''C.&nbsp;glabrata'', ''C.&nbsp;krusei'', ''C.&nbsp;parapsilosis'', ''C.&nbsp;guilliermondii'', ''C.&nbsp;viswanathii'', ''C.&nbsp;lusitaniae'', and ''Rhodotorula mucilaginosa''.
When yeast is used for making bread, it is mixed with flour, salt, and warm water or milk.
Researchers speculate a mixture of flour meal and water was left longer than usual on a warm day and the yeasts that occur in natural contaminants of the flour caused it to ferment before baking.
They are estimated to constitute 1% of all described fungal species.
Common media used for the cultivation of yeasts include potato dextrose agar or potato dextrose broth, Wallerstein Laboratories nutrient agar, yeast peptone dextrose agar, and yeast mould agar or broth.
''S.&nbsp;cerevisiae'' has been sold commercially by the Dutch for bread-making since 1780; while, around 1800, the Germans started producing ''S.&nbsp;cerevisiae'' in the form of cream.
(2008) citing Loureiro and Malfeito-Ferreira from 2006 when they affirmed that current molecular DNA detection techniques have uncovered no variance between the anamorph and teleomorph states.
Some recipes refer to this as proofing the yeast, as it "proves" (tests) the viability of the yeast before the other ingredients are added.
Carbohydrate-containing plant material is fermented by yeast, producing a dilute solution of ethanol in the process.
The first records that show this use came from Ancient Egypt.
Some bread doughs are knocked back after one rising and left to rise again (this is called dough proofing) and then baked.
A weak solution of water and sugar can be used to determine whether yeast is expired.
This is mainly because these species can grow in the presence of high sucrose, ethanol, acetic acid, sorbic acid, benzoic acid, and sulphur dioxide concentrations, representing some of the commonly used food preservation methods.
Yeasts are very common in the environment, and are often isolated from sugar-rich materials.
Some yeasts are found in association with soil and insects.
The cells of these yeast are surrounded by a rigid polysaccharide capsule, which helps to prevent them from being recognised and engulfed by white blood cells in the human body.
So-called red rice yeast is actually a mold, ''Monascus purpureus''.
The appearance of a white, thready yeast, commonly known as kahm yeast, is often a byproduct of the lactofermentation (or pickling) of certain vegetables, usually the result of exposure to air.
During World War II, Fleischmann's developed a granulated active dry yeast which did not require refrigeration, had a longer shelf life than fresh yeast, and rose twice as fast.
Yeast killer toxins may also have medical applications in treating yeast infections (see "Pathogenic yeasts" section below).
The growth of some yeasts, such as ''Zygosaccharomyces'' and ''Brettanomyces'', in wine can result in wine faults and subsequent spoilage.
Alcoholic beverages are defined as beverages that contain ethanol (C2H5OH).
''Candida'' is commonly found as a commensal yeast in the mucous membranes of humans and other warm-blooded animals.
Yeast is used in nutritional supplements popular with health-conscious individuals and those following vegan diets.
The dying yeast cells are then heated to complete their breakdown, after which the husks (yeast with thick cell walls that would give poor texture) are separated.
Nutritional yeast has a nutty, cheesy flavor that makes it popular as an ingredient in cheese substitutes.
Yeasts include some of the most widely used model organisms for genetics and cell biology.
have seen an increasing use in the craft-brewing sector of the industry, with a handful of breweries having produced beers that were primarily fermented with pure cultures of ''Brettanomyces'' spp.
In 1857, French microbiologist Louis Pasteur proved in the paper "''Mémoire sur la fermentation alcoolique''" that alcoholic fermentation was conducted by living yeasts and not by a chemical catalyst.
Those are the anamorphs ''Brettanomyces bruxellensis'', ''Brettanomyces anomalus'', ''Brettanomyces custersianus'', ''Brettanomyces naardenensis'', and ''Brettanomyces nanus'', with teleomorphs existing for the first two species, ''Dekkera bruxellensis'' and ''Dekkera anomala''.
Researchers have used it to gather information about the biology of the eukaryotic cell and ultimately human biology.
As of 2014, over 50 yeast species have had their genomes sequenced and published.
Yeasts are chemoorganotrophs, as they use organic compounds as a source of energy and do not require sunlight to grow.
When a sourdough starter is used, flour and water are added instead of sugar; this is referred to as proofing the sponge.
A wide variety of chemical in different classes can be produced by engineered yeast, including phenolics, isoprenoids, alkaloids, and polyketides.
It is also a centrally important model organism in modern cell biology research, and is one of the most thoroughly researched eukaryotic microorganisms.
Carbon is obtained mostly from hexose sugars, such as glucose and fructose, or disaccharides such as sucrose and maltose.
The dough is kneaded until it is smooth, and then left to rise, sometimes until it has doubled in size.
It can also tolerate high concentrations of salt and heavy metals, and is being investigated for its potential as a heavy metal biosorbent.
The most common mode of vegetative growth in yeast is asexual reproduction by budding.
In the solution, active yeast will foam and bubble as it ferments the sugar into ethanol and carbon dioxide.
presented evidence that in natural ''S.
In 1920, the Fleischmann Yeast Company began to promote yeast cakes in a successful "Yeast for Health" campaign.
During their growth, yeasts metabolize some food components and produce metabolic end products.
Yeasts are unicellular organisms which evolved from multicellular ancestors, with some species having the ability to develop multicellular characteristics by forming strings of connected budding cells known as pseudohyphae or false hyphae.
Top-cropping yeasts are so called because they form a foam at the top of the wort during fermentation.
However, sometimes these same strains can become pathogenic.
Haploid cells may then reproduce asexually by mitosis.
The term "yeast" is often taken as a synonym for ''Saccharomyces cerevisiae'', but the phylogenetic diversity of yeasts is shown by their placement in two separate phyla: the Ascomycota and the Basidiomycota.
Fungal species that can take both forms (depending on temperature or other conditions) are called dimorphic fungi ("dimorphic" means "having two forms").
In oenology, the major spoilage yeast is ''Brettanomyces bruxellensis''.
The fad for yeast cakes lasted until the late 1930s.
The CO2 is injected in the aquarium through a narrow hose and released through a diffuser that helps dissolve the gas in the water.
Decades ago, taxonomists reclassified ''S.&nbsp;carlsbergensis'' (uvarum) as a member of ''S.&nbsp;cerevisiae'', noting that the only distinct difference between the two is metabolic.
Unlike bacteria, no known yeast species grow only anaerobically (obligate anaerobes).
Yeast is often used by aquarium hobbyists to generate carbon dioxide (CO2) to nourish plants in planted aquaria.
Methylene blue is used to test for the presence of live yeast cells.
Yeast sizes vary greatly, depending on species and environment, typically measuring 3–4&nbsp;µm in diameter, although some yeasts can grow to 40&nbsp;µm in size.
Some yeasts can find potential application in the field of bioremediation.
These observations suggest that the possible long-term benefits of outcrossing (e.g.
The dough is then shaped into loaves.
have been the subjects of numerous studies conducted over the past century, although a majority of the recent research has focused on enhancing the knowledge of the wine industry.
Also, yeasts are easily manipulated and cultured in the laboratory, which has allowed for the development of powerful standard techniques, such as yeast two-hybrid, synthetic genetic array analysis, and tetrad analysis.
Different yeasts from Brazilian gold mines bioaccumulate free and complexed silver ions.
The growth of yeast within food products is often seen on their surfaces, as in cheeses or meats, or by the fermentation of sugars in beverages, such as juices, and semiliquid products, such as syrups and jams.
Yeast species either require oxygen for aerobic cellular respiration (obligate aerobes) or are anaerobic, but also have aerobic methods of energy production (facultative anaerobes).
The cells can survive freezing under certain conditions, with viability decreasing over time.
In the United States, naturally occurring airborne yeasts were used almost exclusively until commercial yeast was marketed at the Centennial Exposition in 1876 in Philadelphia, where Charles L. Fleischmann exhibited the product and a process to use it, as well as serving the resultant baked bread.
Spirits such as whiskey and rum are prepared by distilling these dilute solutions of ethanol.
The useful physiological properties of yeast have led to their use in the field of biotechnology.
For this reason, a pure yeast culture is usually added to the must; this yeast quickly dominates the fermentation.
''S.&nbsp;boulardii'' has been shown to reduce the symptoms of acute diarrhea, reduce the chance of infection by ''Clostridium difficile'' (often identified simply as C. difficile or C. diff), reduce bowel movements in diarrhea-predominant IBS patients, and reduce the incidence of antibiotic-, traveler's-, and HIV/AIDS-associated diarrheas.
Home brewers who cultivate yeast frequently use dried malt extract and agar as a solid growth medium.
Early classification was based on a few species that reproduced asexually (anamorph form) through multipolar budding.
The antibiotic cycloheximide is sometimes added to yeast growth media to inhibit the growth of ''Saccharomyces'' yeasts and select for wild/indigenous yeast species.
They are the species primarily responsible for cryptococcosis, a fungal disease that occurs in about one million HIV/AIDS patients, causing over 600,000 deaths annually.
It is also naturally low in fat and sodium.
This form perishes quickly, so must be used soon after production.
Bottom-cropping yeasts are typically used to produce lager-type beers, though they can also produce ale-type beers.
It was the sixth eukaryotic genome sequenced and consists of 13.8&nbsp;million base pairs.
However, baking and brewing yeasts typically belong to different strains, cultivated to favour different characteristics: baking yeast strains are more aggressive, to carbonate dough in the shortest amount of time possible; brewing yeast strains act slower but tend to produce fewer off-flavours and tolerate higher alcohol concentrations (with some strains, up to 22%).
It is not known when yeast was first used to bake bread.
Some brands of nutritional yeast, though not all, are fortified with vitamin B12, which is produced separately by bacteria.
Today, there are several retailers of baker's yeast; one of the best-known in North America is Fleischmann's Yeast, which was developed in 1868.
Lager strains of ''S.&nbsp;cerevisiae'' secrete an enzyme called melibiase, allowing them to hydrolyse melibiose, a disaccharide, into more fermentable monosaccharides.
Many types of yeasts are used for making many foods: baker's yeast in bread production, brewer's yeast in beer fermentation, and yeast in wine fermentation and for xylitol production.
pombe'' to hydrogen peroxide, an agent that causes oxidative stress leading to oxidative DNA damage, strongly induces mating and the formation of meiotic spores.
Yeast, the most common one being ''S.&nbsp;cerevisiae'', is used in baking as a leavening agent, where it converts the food/fermentable sugars present in dough into the gas carbon dioxide.
Here, a small bud (also known as a bleb), or daughter cell, is formed on the parent cell.
cerevisiae'' strains led to the conclusion that out-crossing occurs only about once every 50,000 cell divisions.
Researchers from the University of British Columbia, Canada, have found a new strain of yeast that has reduced amines.
Their later advertising claimed a much broader range of health benefits, and was censured as misleading by the Federal Trade Commission.
''Dekkera''/''Brettanomyces'' spp.
Some pucciniomycete yeasts, in particular species of ''Sporidiobolus'' and ''Sporobolomyces'', produce aerially dispersed, asexual ballistoconidia.
The yeast has a negative effect on the bacteria that normally produce antibiotics to kill the parasite, so may affect the ants' health by allowing the parasite to spread.
Such a development means ethanol can be efficiently produced from more inexpensive feedstocks, making cellulosic ethanol fuel a more competitively priced alternative to gasoline fuels.
Together, these compounds are often referred to as "''Brettanomyces'' character", and are often described as "antiseptic" or "barnyard" type aromas.
They initially emphasized yeast's importance as a source of vitamins, good for skin and digestion.
Yeast extract is the common name for various forms of processed yeast products that are used as food additives or flavours.
This causes the dough to expand or rise as gas forms pockets or bubbles.
Most yeasts reproduce asexually by mitosis, and many do so by the asymmetric division process known as budding.
Over the past decade, ''Brettanomyces'' spp.
The CO2 is used by plants in the photosynthesis process.
In addition, ''Saccharomyces exiguus'' (also known as ''S.&nbsp;minor''), a wild yeast found on plants, fruits, and grains, is occasionally used for baking.
The industrial production of yeast blocks was enhanced by the introduction of the filter press in 1867.
The process starts by milling a feedstock, such as sugar cane, field corn, or other cereal grains, and then adding dilute sulfuric acid, or fungal alpha amylase enzymes, to break down the starches into complex sugars.
In breadmaking, the yeast initially respires aerobically, producing carbon dioxide and water.
The distinction between ''Dekkera'' and ''Brettanomyces'' is arguable, with Oelofse et al.
Yeasts of the ''Candida'' genus, another group of opportunistic pathogens, cause oral and vaginal infections in humans, known as candidiasis.
At the time, it was the most complex organism to have its full genome sequenced, and the work seven years and the involvement of more than 100 laboratories to accomplish.
cerevisiae'', though not all strains of the species are suitable.
Several yeasts, in particular ''S.&nbsp;cerevisiae'', have been widely used in genetics and cell biology, largely because ''S.&nbsp;cerevisiae'' is a simple eukaryotic cell, serving as a model for all eukaryotes, including humans, for the study of fundamental cellular processes such as the cell cycle, DNA replication, recombination, cell division, and metabolism.
It can also be used in mashed and fried potatoes, as well as in scrambled eggs.
In general, under high-stress conditions such as nutrient starvation, haploid cells will die; under the same conditions, however, diploid cells can undergo sporulation, entering sexual reproduction (meiosis) and producing a variety of haploid spores, which can go on to mate (conjugate), reforming the diploid.
When the oxygen is depleted, fermentation begins, producing ethanol as a waste product; however, this evaporates during baking.
cerevisiae'' populations clonal reproduction and selfing (in the form of intratetrad mating) predominate.
This will change the yeast process.
Brewer's yeast is also very rich in essential minerals and the B vitamins (except B12).
About 20% of biopharmaceuticals are produced in ''S.&nbsp;cerevisiae'', including insulin, vaccines for hepatitis, and human serum albumin.
A distilled beverage is a beverage containing ethanol that has been purified by distillation.
Pasteur showed that by bubbling oxygen into the yeast broth, cell growth could be increased, but fermentation was inhibited&nbsp;– an observation later called the "Pasteur effect".
In Australia, it is sometimes sold as "savoury yeast flakes".
Different ''S.&nbsp;cerevisiae'' yeast strains have differing physiological and fermentative properties, therefore the actual strain of yeast selected can have a direct impact on the finished wine.
''S.&nbsp;cerevisiae'' is easy to genetically engineer; its physiology, metabolism and genetics are well known, and it is amenable for use in harsh industrial conditions.
A longer rising time gives a better flavour, but the yeast can fail to raise the bread in the final stages if it is left for too long initially.
Yeasts have recently been used to generate electricity in microbial fuel cells, and produce ethanol for the biofuel industry.
''Brettanomyces'' is a significant contributor to wine faults within the wine industry.
Though "nutritional yeast" usually refers to commercial products, inadequately fed prisoners have used "home-grown" yeast to prevent vitamin deficiency.
Many proteins important in human biology were first discovered by studying their homologues in yeast; these proteins include cell cycle proteins, signaling proteins, and protein-processing enzymes.
The resulting bread would have been lighter and tastier than the normal flat, hard cake.
When the dough is baked, the yeast dies and the air pockets "set", giving the baked product a soft and spongy texture.
generation of diversity) are likely to be insufficient for generally maintaining sex from one generation to the next.
About 30% of people are sensitive to biogenic amines, such as histamines.
These yeasts ferment well at low temperatures.
Some yeasts, including ''Schizosaccharomyces pombe'', reproduce by fission instead of budding, thereby creating two identically sized daughter cells.
This causes the physical, chemical, and sensible properties of a food to change, and the food is spoiled.
Contrary to some claims, it contains little or no vitamin B12.
This triggers autolysis, wherein the yeast's digestive enzymes break their own proteins down into simpler compounds, a process of self-destruction.
The amines in red wine and Chardonnay produce off-flavors and cause headaches and hypertension in some people.
The second yeast species to have its genome sequenced was ''Schizosaccharomyces pombe'', which was completed in 2002.
Certain strains of some species of yeasts produce proteins called yeast killer toxins that allow them to eliminate competing strains.
