'''Yellowstone National Park''' is a national park located primarily in the U.S. state of Wyoming, although it also extends into Montana and Idaho.
The Heritage and Research Center is located at Gardiner, Montana, near the north entrance to the park.
However, these changes demonstrate the dynamic nature of the Yellowstone hydrothermal system.
Ongoing poaching and destruction of natural resources continued unabated until the U.S.&nbsp;Army arrived at Mammoth Hot Springs in 1886 and built Camp Sheridan.
The center is home to the Yellowstone National Park's museum collection, archives, research library, historian, archeology lab, and herbarium.
The record high temperature was  in 2002, while the coldest temperature recorded is  in 1933.
There are  of hiking trails available.
However, the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) has stated that bison are the "likely source" of the spread of the disease in cattle in Wyoming and North Dakota.
The retrieval of these bacteria can be achieved with no impact to the ecosystem.
The Lacey Act of 1900 provided legal support for the officials prosecuting poachers.
They were being pursued by the U.S.&nbsp;Army and entered the national park about two weeks after the Battle of the Big Hole.
Fire was seen as a purely destructive force and there was little understanding that it was an integral part of the ecosystem.
Visitors welcomed the chance to get their pictures taken with the bears, who had learned to beg for food.
Justin Ferrell explores three moral sensibilities that motivated activists in dealing with Yellowstone.
Traffic jams created by road construction or by people observing wildlife can result in long delays.
Management and control of the park originally fell under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Interior, the first being Columbus Delano.
The eighth recorded bear-related death in the park's history occurred in August 2015.
The wolverine is another rare park mammal, and accurate population figures for this species are not known.
Yellowstone is in the midst of a long term road reconstruction effort, which is hampered by a short repair season.
Park service roads lead to major features; however, road reconstruction has produced temporary road closures.
This led to numerous injuries to humans each year.
In 1871, eleven years after his failed first effort, Ferdinand V. Hayden was finally able  to explore the region.
To this end, numerous bills were introduced into Congress by Montana representatives who sought to remove the federal land-use restrictions.
The magma chamber that lies under Yellowstone is estimated to be a single connected chamber, about  long,  wide, and 3 to 7 miles (5 to 12&nbsp;km) deep.
Extremely rare sightings of whooping cranes have been recorded, however only three examples of this species are known to live in the Rocky Mountains, out of 385 known worldwide.
Langford served for five years but was denied a salary, funding, and staff.
In a paper known as the Leopold Report, the committee observed that culling programs at other national parks had been ineffective, and recommended management of Yellowstone's elk population.
* SCHUYLER COLFAX, Vice-President of the United States and President of the Senate.
The National Park Service began firefighting efforts to keep the fires under control, but the extreme drought made suppression difficult.
Winter in Yellowstone is accompanied by high temperatures usually between zero and 20&nbsp;°F (−20 to −5&nbsp;°C) and nighttime temperatures below 0 &nbsp;°F (−18&nbsp;°C) for most of the winter.
In 1880, Harry Yount was appointed as a gamekeeper to control poaching and vandalism in the park.
The Yellowstone Park bison herd is believed to be one of only four free roaming and genetically pure herds on public lands in North America.
Lava flows and rocks from volcanic eruptions cover most of the land area of Yellowstone.
Hunting is not permitted, though it is allowed in the surrounding national forests during open season.
The park sits on the Yellowstone Plateau, at an average elevation of  above sea level.
About thirty-five natural forest fires are ignited each year by lightning, while another six to ten are started by people— in most cases by accident.
It has many types of ecosystems, but the subalpine forest is the most abundant.
Backcountry campsites are accessible only by foot or by horseback and require a permit.
Native Americans have lived in the Yellowstone region for at least 11,000&nbsp;years.
Nine park visitors were briefly taken captive.
Camping is also available in surrounding National Forests, as well as in Grand Teton National Park to the south.
Controlled burns are prescribed fires which are deliberately started to remove dead timber under conditions which allow fire fighters an opportunity to carefully control where and how much wood is consumed.
On March 10, 2004, a biologist discovered 5 dead bison which apparently had inhaled toxic geothermal gases trapped in the Norris Geyser Basin by a seasonal atmospheric inversion.
Feeding and close contact with bears has not been permitted since the 1960s to reduce their desire for human foods.
Visitors with pets are required to keep them on a leash at all times and are limited to areas near roadways and in "frontcountry" zones such as drive in campgrounds.
Boating is prohibited on rivers and creeks except for a  stretch of the Lewis River between Lewis and Shoshone Lake, and it is open to non-motorized use only.
This is largely because Yellowstone is actually a massive caldera of a supervolcano.
A study that was completed in 2011 found that at least 1283 geysers have erupted in Yellowstone.
The estimated 8,000 examples of this rare flowering plant all make their home in the sandy soils on the shores of Yellowstone Lake, well above the waterline.
After splitting up with the other trappers in 1807, Colter passed through a portion of what later became the park, during the winter of 1807–1808.
During World War&nbsp;II, tourist travel fell sharply, staffing was cut, and many facilities fell into disrepair.
A smaller eruption ejected 67&nbsp;cubic miles (280&nbsp;km³) of material 1.3&nbsp;million years ago, forming the Henry's Fork Caldera and depositing the Mesa Falls Tuff.
The aspen forests have declined significantly since the early 20th century, but scientists at Oregon State University attribute recent recovery of the aspen to the reintroduction of wolves which has changed the grazing habits of local elk.
Subalpine Fir, Engelmann Spruce, Whitebark Pine, and other species tend to grow in colder and moister areas, where fire is less likely to occur.
Starting in 1914, in an effort to protect elk populations, the U.S. Congress appropriated funds to be used for the purposes of "destroying wolves, prairie dogs, and other animals injurious to agriculture and animal husbandry" on public lands.
In December 2008, over 250 earthquakes were measured over a four-day span under Yellowstone Lake, the largest measuring a magnitude of 3.9.
It formed the relatively small caldera that contains the West Thumb of Yellowstone Lake.
The precipitation of Yellowstone is greatly influenced by the moisture channel formed by the Snake River Plain to the west that was, in turn, formed by Yellowstone itself.
Consequently, until the 1970s, when a better understanding of wildfire was developed, all fires were suppressed.
Yellowstone National Park has three fire lookout towers, each staffed by trained fire fighters.
The report helped to convince the U.S. Congress to withdraw this region from public auction.
The plateau is bounded on nearly all sides by mountain ranges of the Middle Rocky Mountains, which range from  in elevation.
A survey conducted in 2005 reported that there were 13 wolf packs, totaling 118 individuals in Yellowstone and 326 in the entire ecosystem.
'''THE ACT OF DEDICATION'''
CCC projects included reforestation, campground development of many of the park's trails and campgrounds, trail construction, fire hazard reduction, and fire-fighting work.
Several geysers became so hot that they were transformed into purely steaming features; the water had become superheated and they could no longer erupt normally.
After the park's official formation, Nathaniel Langford was appointed as the park's first superintendent in 1872 by Secretary of Interior Columbus Delano.
Yount is the first national park ranger, and Yount's Peak, at the head of the Yellowstone River, was named in his honor.
The human history of the park begins at least 11,000 years ago when Native Americans  began to hunt and fish in the region.
Fire monitors also regulate fire through educational services to the public and have been known to temporarily ban campfires from campgrounds during periods of high fire danger.
The National Park Service estimates that in natural conditions, grasslands in Yellowstone burned an average of every 20 to 25 years, while forests in the park would experience fire about every 300 years.
Population figures for elk are in excess of 30,000—the largest population of any large mammal species in Yellowstone.
The park is known for its wildlife and its many geothermal features, especially Old Faithful Geyser, one of its most popular features.
Aspen trees sprout new growth from their roots, and even if a severe fire kills the tree above ground, the roots often survive unharmed because they are insulated from the heat by soil.
However, these measures still proved to be insufficient in protecting the park, as neither Norris, nor the three superintendents who followed, were given sufficient manpower or resources.
The Yellowstone National Park Archives maintain collections of historical records of Yellowstone and the National Park Service.
Since the last supereruption, a series of smaller eruptive cycles between 640,000 and 70,000&nbsp;years ago, has nearly filled in the Yellowstone Caldera with >80 different eruptions of rhyolitic lavas such as those that can be seen at Obsidian Cliffs and basaltic lavas which can be viewed at Sheepeater Cliff.
However, the coyote is not able to bring down large animals, and the result of this lack of a top predator on these populations was a marked increase in lame and sick megafauna.
In 1875, Colonel William Ludlow, who had previously explored areas of Montana under the command of George Armstrong Custer, was assigned to organize and lead an expedition to Montana and the newly established Yellowstone Park.
Ecologists point out that the bison are merely traveling to seasonal grazing areas that lie within the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem that have been converted to cattle grazing, some of which are within National Forests and are leased to private ranchers.
It has been termed a "supervolcano" because the caldera was formed by exceptionally large explosive eruptions.
The southern herd migrates southward, and the majority of these elk winter on the National Elk Refuge, immediately southeast of Grand Teton National Park.
These events inspired a great deal of media attention and speculation about the geologic future of the region.
The other three herds are the Henry Mountains bison herd of Utah, at Wind Cave National Park in South Dakota and in Elk Island National Park in Alberta.
The easiest one to reach is atop Mount Washburn, though it is closed to the public.
The members of the Folsom party kept a journal and based on the information it reported, a party of Montana residents organized the Washburn-Langford-Doane Expedition in 1870.
Yellowstone National Park spans an area of , comprising lakes, canyons, rivers and mountain ranges.
Other less commonly seen mammals include the mountain lion and wolverine.
The time between the last three cataclysmic eruptions in the Yellowstone area has ranged from 600,000 to 800,000&nbsp;years, but the small number of such climactic eruptions cannot be used to make an accurate prediction for future volcanic events.
AN ACT to set apart a certain tract of land lying near the headwaters of the Yellowstone River as a public park.
Half of the world's geothermal features are in Yellowstone, fueled by this ongoing volcanism.
Other birds, considered to be species of special concern because of their rarity in Yellowstone, include the common loon, harlequin duck, osprey, peregrine falcon and the trumpeter swan.
The first detailed expedition to the Yellowstone area was the Cook–Folsom–Peterson Expedition of 1869, which consisted of three privately funded explorers.
They also oversee gas stations, stores and most of the campgrounds.
He compiled a comprehensive report, including large-format photographs by William Henry Jackson and paintings by Thomas Moran.
Salt Lake City,  to the south, is the closest large metropolitan area.
Approved March 1, 1872.
As of 2007, the whitebark pine is threatened by a fungus known as white pine blister rust; however, this is mostly confined to forests well to the north and west.
Experts responded to the conjecture by informing the public that there was no increased risk of a volcanic eruption in the near future.
It was established by the U.S.&nbsp;Congress and signed into law by President Ulysses S. Grant on March 1, 1872.
(which oversees threatened and endangered species), northwestern wolves imported from Canada were reintroduced into the park.
In 2010, Yellowstone National Park was honored with its own quarter under the America the Beautiful Quarters Program.
He wished for others to see and experience it as well.
Approximately  or 36% of the parkland was impacted by the fires, leading to a systematic re-evaluation of fire management policies.
Yellowstone experiences thousands of small earthquakes every year, virtually all of which are undetectable to people.
During the 1870s and 1880s Native American tribes were effectively excluded from the national park.
The canyon is a classic V-shaped valley, indicative of river-type erosion rather than erosion caused by glaciation.
Fire management focuses on monitoring dead and down wood quantities, soil and tree moisture, and the weather, to determine those areas most vulnerable to fire should one ignite.
Another three percent is within Montana, with the remaining one percent in Idaho.
With government sponsorship, he returned to the region with a second, larger expedition, the Hayden Geological Survey of 1871.
Camping is available at a dozen campgrounds with more than 2,000 campsites.
Quaking Aspen and willows are the most common species of deciduous trees.
Another 170 species are considered to be exotic species and are non-native.
Few fires burn more than , and the vast majority of fires reach only a little over an acre (0.5&nbsp;ha) before they burn themselves out.
Observations about the lawlessness and exploitation of park resources were included in Ludlow's ''Report of a Reconnaissance to the Yellowstone National Park''.
Between July 15 and 21, 1988, fires quickly spread from  throughout the entire Yellowstone region, which included areas outside the park, to  on the park land alone.
When the National Park Service was created in 1916, many of the management principles developed by the army were adopted by the new agency.
''Thermus aquaticus'' is a bacterium found in the Yellowstone hot springs that produces an important enzyme (Taq polymerase) that is easily replicated in the lab and is useful in replicating DNA as part of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) process.
The Northern Pacific Railroad built a train station in Livingston, Montana, connecting to the northern entrance in the early 1880s, which helped to increase visitation from 300 in 1872 to 5,000 in 1883.
There are dozens of species of flowering plants that have been identified, most of which bloom between the months of May and September.
A total of 25,000 firefighters and U.S. military forces participated in the suppression efforts, at a cost of 120 million dollars.
There is no public transportation available inside the park, but several tour companies can be contacted for guided motorized transport.
There are almost 60 species of mammals in the park, including the gray wolf, coyote, the threatened Canadian lynx, and grizzly bears.
The most prominent summit on the Yellowstone Plateau is Mount Washburn at .
Concessionaires manage nine hotels and lodges, with a total of 2,238 hotel rooms and cabins available.
Having traveled through Yellowstone and witnessed land management problems first hand, Philetus Norris volunteered for the position following Langford's exit.
They left the area under the assurances of a treaty negotiated in 1868, under which the Sheepeaters ceded their lands but retained the right to hunt in Yellowstone.
Other large mammals include the bison (often referred to as buffalo), black bear, elk, moose, mule deer, white-tailed deer, mountain goat, pronghorn, bighorn sheep, and cougar.
1988 started with a wet spring season although by summer, drought began moving in throughout the northern Rockies, creating the driest year on record to that point.
Another 800 employees work either permanently or seasonally for the National Park Service.
The twentieth century saw the biocentric moral vision that focuses on the health of the ecosystem as theorized by Aldo Leopold, which leds to the expansion of federally protected areas  and to the surrounding ecosystems.
Aside from visits by mountain men during the early-to-mid-19th century, organized exploration did not begin until the late 1860s.
The Yellowstone cutthroat trout has faced several threats since the 1980s, including the suspected illegal introduction into Yellowstone Lake of lake trout, an invasive species which consume the smaller cutthroat trout.
Yellowstone contains at least 10,000 geothermal features altogether.
Elk also carry the disease and are believed to have transmitted the infection to horses and cattle.
This quake triggered a huge landslide, which caused a partial dam collapse on Hebgen Lake; immediately downstream, the sediment from the landslide dammed the river and created a new lake, known as Earthquake Lake.
An estimated 600 grizzly bears live in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, with more than half of the population living within Yellowstone.
Half the geothermal features and two-thirds of the world's geysers are concentrated in Yellowstone.
Congress finally saw fit to implement a salary for the position, as well as to provide a minimal funding to operate the park.
The origins of the Yellowstone and Snake Rivers are near each other but on opposite sides of the divide.
After an 1856 exploration, mountain man Jim Bridger (also believed to be the first or second European American to have seen the Great Salt Lake) reported observing boiling springs, spouting water, and a mountain of glass and yellow rock.
The army turned control over to the National Park Service on October 31, 1918.
The park is  north to south, and  west to east by air.
Three deep canyons are located in the park, cut through the volcanic tuff of the Yellowstone Plateau by rivers over the last 640,000&nbsp;years.
The CCC built the majority of the early visitor centers, campgrounds and the current system of park roads.
The Yellowstone Park bison herd is the oldest and largest public bison herd in the United States.
This was the largest earthquake to hit the park since February 22, 1980.
As of late 2007, the uplift has continued at a reduced rate.
A 6.1‑magnitude earthquake struck inside the park on June 30, 1975, but damage was minimal.
Yellowstone National Park is the centerpiece of the 20&nbsp;million acre/31,250&nbsp;square-mile (8,093,712&nbsp;ha/80,937&nbsp;km2) Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, a region that includes Grand Teton National Park, adjacent National Forests and expansive wilderness areas in those forests.
The National Park Service maintains a year-round clinic at Mammoth Hot Springs and provides emergency services throughout the year.
The mountain lion has an estimated population of only 25 individuals parkwide.
The Folsom party followed the Yellowstone River to Yellowstone Lake.
Yellowstone was designated an International Biosphere Reserve on October 26, 1976, and a UN World Heritage Site on September 8, 1978.
The most violent known eruption, which occurred 2.1&nbsp;million years ago, ejected 588&nbsp;cubic miles (2,450&nbsp;km³) of volcanic material and created the rock formation known as the Huckleberry Ridge Tuff and created the Island Park Caldera.
While passing through present day Montana, the expedition members heard of the Yellowstone region to the south, but they did not investigate it.
Later, American trappers rendered the French name in English as "Yellow Stone".
During the summer months of June through early September, daytime highs are normally in the  range, while night time lows can go to below freezing (0&nbsp;°C) especially at higher altitudes.
The famed Beartooth Highway provides access from the northeast and has spectacular high altitude scenery.
These swarms of earthquakes are common, and there have been 70 such swarms between 1983 and 2008.
Seven large fires were responsible for 95% of the  that were burned over the next couple of months.
Castle Geyser, Lion Geyser and Beehive Geyser are in the same basin.
In an 1871 letter from Jay Cooke to Ferdinand V. Hayden, Cooke wrote that his friend, Congressman William D. Kelley had also suggested "Congress pass a bill reserving the Great Geyser Basin as a public park forever".
In Yellowstone's hot waters, bacteria form mats of bizarre shapes consisting of trillions of individuals.
Fire Management Plans were implemented, detailing that natural fires should be allowed to burn if they posed no immediate threat to lives and property.
311 species of birds have been reported, almost half of which nest in Yellowstone.
Other bacteria in the Yellowstone hot springs may also prove useful to scientists who are searching for cures for various diseases.
The fire season of 1988 was considered normal until a combination of drought and heat by mid-July contributed to an extreme fire danger.
Though exotic species are most commonly found in areas with the greatest human visitation, such as near roads and at major tourist areas, they have also spread into the backcountry.
Second was the spiritual vision of nature inspired by the Romanticism and the transcendentalists the mid-19th century.
Twenty-eight people were killed, and property damage was extensive in the immediate region.
These uncommon and rare mammals provide insight into the health of protected lands such as Yellowstone and help managers make determinations as to how best to preserve habitats.
The Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC), a New Deal relief agency for young men, played a major role between 1933 and 1942 in developing Yellowstone facilities.
These reports were largely ignored because Bridger was a known "spinner of yarns".
In the winter, all roads aside from the one which enters from Gardiner, Montana, and extends to Cooke City, Montana, are closed to wheeled vehicles.
The grizzly is currently listed as a threatened species, however the U.S.
The caldera is considered an active volcano.
Fire towers are staffed almost continuously from late June to mid-September— the primary fire season.
Bison once numbered between 30 and 60 million individuals throughout North America, and Yellowstone remains one of their last strongholds.
The earthquake caused some geysers in the northwestern section of the park to erupt, large cracks in the ground formed and emitted steam, and some hot springs that normally have clear water turned muddy.
With the successful wolf reintroduction program, which began in the 1990s, virtually all the original faunal species known to inhabit the region when white explorers first entered the area can still be found there.
APHIS has stated that with vaccinations and other means, brucellosis can be eliminated from the bison and elk herds throughout Yellowstone.
As a result, Langford was forced to step down in 1877.
In his report to the Committee on Public Lands, he concluded that if the bill failed to become law, "the vandals who are now waiting to enter into this wonder-land, will in a single season despoil, beyond recovery, these remarkable curiosities, which have required all the cunning skill of nature thousands of years to prepare".
He observed at least one geothermal area in the northeastern section of the park, near Tower Fall.
Planned to be completed by 1966, in honor of the 50th anniversary of the founding of the National Park Service, Mission&nbsp;66 construction diverged from the traditional log cabin style with design features of a modern style.
Opponents of delisting the grizzly are concerned that states might once again allow hunting and that better conservation measures need to be implemented to ensure a sustainable population.
Research indicated that these uplifts posed no immediate threat of a volcanic eruption, since they may have developed long ago, and there had been no temperature increase found near the uplifts.
It is closely related to species usually found in much warmer climates, making the sand verbena an enigma.
A group of Bannocks entered the park in 1878, alarming park Superintendent Philetus Norris.
The park is the centerpiece of the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem, the largest remaining nearly-intact ecosystem in the Earth's northern temperate zone.
Some of the Nez Perce were friendly to the tourists and other people they encountered in the park; some were not.
Called the Teton–Yellowstone tornado, it was classified as an F4, with wind speeds estimated at between .
The current caldera was created by a cataclysmic eruption that occurred 640,000&nbsp;years ago, which released more than 240&nbsp;cubic miles (1,000&nbsp;km³) of ash, rock and pyroclastic materials.
Near the end of the 18th century, French trappers named the river "Roche Jaune",  which is probably a translation of the Hidatsa name "''Mi tsi a-da-zi''" (Rock Yellow River).
On March 1, 1872, President Ulysses S. Grant signed ''The Act of Dedication'' law that created Yellowstone National Park.
Visitors in these early years faced poor roads and limited services, and most access into the park was on horse or via stagecoach.
By the end of the month, the fires were out of control.
First came the utilitarian vision of maximum exploitation of natural resources, characteristic of developers in the late 19th century.
In 2003 the tracks of one female lynx and her cub were spotted and followed for over .
