U.S. drone strikes continued after the ousting of President Saleh.
A 2015 study estimates a mere 400 believers in Christ from a Muslim background in the country.
The Sabaean rulers adopted the title Mukarrib generally thought to mean "unifier", or a "priest-king", or the head of confederation of South Arabian kingdoms, the 'king of the kings'.
The Ottomans had two fundamental interests to safeguard in Yemen: The Islamic holy cities of Mecca and Medina, and the trade route with India in spices and textiles, both of which were threatened and the latter virtually eclipsed by the arrival of the Portuguese in the Indian Ocean and the Red Sea in the early part of the 16th century.
Isis has claimed recent, bloody suicide bombings in Houthi mosques and Sana’a when it once had no known presence in the country, while AQAP has continued to seize territory in eastern Yemen unhindered by American drone strikes."
In 2012 total active troops were estimated as follows: army, 390,000; navy, 7,000; and air force, 5,000.
As of  2013, Yemen had an industrial production growth rate of 4.8%.
The Rasulid state nurtured Yemen's commercial links with India and the Far East.
They returned to the Tihama in 1849 after an absence of two centuries.
The chief of the Dahlak islands exported slaves, as well as amber and leopard hides, to the then ruler of Yemen.
East India Company officials decided on Aden.
Al-Mu'ayyad Muhammad captured Zabid in 1634 and allowed the Ottomans to leave Mocha peacefully.
The country established diplomatic relations with the Safavid dynasty of Persia, Ottomans of Hejaz, Mughal Empire in India, and Ethiopia, as well.
The Prison Authority Organization Act, Republican decree no.
The drone strikes are protested by human-rights groups who say they kill innocent civilians and that the U.S. military and CIA drone strikes lack sufficient congressional oversight, including the choice of human targets suspected of being threats to America.
The British realized that Aden's prosperity depended on their relations with the neighboring tribes, which required that they rest on a firm and satisfactory basis.
Television is the most significant media platform in Yemen.
The Zaydi highland tribes emerged as national heroes by offering a stiff, vigorous resistance to the Turkish occupation.
Sana'a is in this region.
In 1850, only 980 Arabs were registered as original inhabitants of the city.
They built schools, mosques, and irrigation channels, as well as water cisterns and bridges in Zabid, Aden, Rada'a, and Juban.
The prime minister, in turn, is appointed by the president and must be approved by two-thirds of the Parliament.
The Ottomans had not decided to conquer Yemen until 1538.
An additional governorate (Soqatra Governorate) was created in December 2013 comprising Socotra Island (bottom-right corner of map), previously part of Hadramaut Governorate.
Nowhere else in the world do 37% of Socotra's 825 plants, 90% of its reptiles and 95% of its snails occur.
An estimated 100,000 people of Indian origin are concentrated in the southern part of the country, around Aden, Mukalla, Shihr, Lahaj, Mokha and Hodeidah.
Out of fear for Hudaydah, Yahya did submit to these demands.
The Ziyadid monarchs lost effective power after 989, or even earlier than that.
His son Ahmed Al-Mukarram led an army to Zabid and killed 8,000 of its inhabitants.
Algebra is said to have been invented there in the early 9th century by the little-known scholar Al-Jazari.
Yemen officially abolished slavery in 1962, but slavery is still being practiced.
Turan Shah conquered Zabid from the Mahdids in May 1174, then marched toward Aden in June and captured it from the Zurayids.
In 1060, Ali ibn Muhammed Al-Sulayhi conquered Zabid and killed its ruler Al-Najah, founder of the Najahid dynasty.
Access to water supply sanitation is as low as in some sub-Saharan African countries.
Then he settled a camp in Bab-el-Mandeb to prevent aid flowing from Aksum.
Many tribes did not recognize Esimiphaios's authority.
Al-Mu'ayyad Muhammad died in 1644.
The Yemeni film industry is in its early stages; only two Yemeni films have been released .
The jumpers train year round for competitions.
, exports from Yemen totaled $6.694 billion.
Temperatures are hot in the day, but fall dramatically at night.
Perennial streams occur in the highlands, but these never reach the sea because of high evaporation in the Tihamah.
Imam Yahya persuaded local tribesmen to follow his teachings.
The flora of Yemen is a mixture of the tropical African, Sudanian plant geographical region and the Saharo-Arabian region.
Health care services are particularly scarce in rural areas.
By 2012 Yemen now has 401,000 active personnel.
As'ad ibn Ibrahim regained Sana'a in 915.
As of the end of 2004, Yemen was divided into twenty governorates (''muhafazat'' - the latest being Raymah Governorate, which was created during 2004) plus one municipality called "Amanat Al-Asemah" (the latter containing the constitutional capital, Sana'a).
Saleh's victory was marked by an election that international observers judged to be "partly free", though the election was accompanied by violence, violations of press freedoms, and allegations of fraud.
It took 700 tons of coal for a round-trip from Suez to Bombay.
Yemen's groundwater is the main source of water in the country but the water tables have dropped severely leaving Yemen without a viable source of water.
During World War II, Aden had increasing economic growth and became the second-busiest port in the world after New York City.
The Sabaean Kingdom came into existence from at least the 11th century BC.
Christians, who were mainly staying in Najran along with Jews, agreed to pay Jizya, although some Jews converted to Islam, such as Wahb ibn Munabbih and Ka'ab al-Ahbar.
The Rasulid sultans built numerous Madrasas  to solidify the Shafi'i school of thought which is still the dominant school of jurisprudence amongst Yemenis today.
It lies south of Saudi Arabia and west of Oman, between latitudes 12 and 19°N and longitudes 42 and 55°E.
The Tihamah ("hot lands" or "hot earth") form a very arid and flat coastal plain along Yemen's entire Red Sea coastline.
Yemen is a largely tribal society.
By claiming descent from a solid Yemenite tribe, the Rasulids brought Yemen to a vital sense of unity in an otherwise chaotic regional milieu.
Close to the Red Sea Coast, the Historic Town of Zabid, inscribed in 1993, was Yemen's capital from the 13th to the 15th century, and is an archaeological and historical site.
Saudi Arabia aided the royalists in their attempt to defeat the Republicans and did not recognize the Yemen Arab Republic until 1970.
The tribal chiefs were difficult to appease and an endless cycle of violence curbed the Ottoman efforts to pacify the land.
He was assassinated by a Yemeni of Persian origin called Fayruz al-Daylami.
They even attempted to secularize the Yemeni society, while Yemenite Jews came to perceive themselves in Yemeni nationalist terms.
President Saleh stepped down and the powers of the presidency were transferred to Vice President Abd Rabbuh Mansur Hadi, who was formally elected president on 21 February 2012 in a one-man election.
Under their rule, most of Yemen enjoyed great autonomy except for Aden and Sana'a.
Phase one of the program included major financial and monetary reforms, including floating the currency, reducing the budget deficit, and cutting subsidies.
In March 2011, police snipers opened fire on the prodemocracy camp in Sana'a, killing more than 50 people.
Hadramawt fell into Sulayhid hands after their capture of Aden in 1162.
The number of military personnel in Yemen is relatively high; in sum, Yemen has the second largest military force on the Arabian Peninsula after Saudi Arabia.
The British government concluded "protection and friendship" treaties with nine tribes surrounding Aden, whereas they would remain independent from British interference in their affairs as long as they do not conclude treaties with foreigners (non-Arab colonial powers).
Al-Hadi will oversee the drafting of a new constitution, followed by parliamentary and presidential elections in 2014.
Total armed forces manning numbers about 401,000 active personnel, including moreover especially conscripts.
Imam al-Mutahhar refused the Ottoman offer.
He continued to follow and attack the Idrsids until Asir fell under the control of the imam's forces, forcing the Idrisi to request an agreement that would enable them to administer the region in the name of the imam.
The British managed to occupy Aden and agreed to compensate the sultan with an annual payment of 6000 riyals.
The Yufirid emir As'ad ibn Ibrahim retreated to Al-Jawf, and between 904 and 913, Sana'a was conquered no less than 20 times by Qarmatians and Yufirids.
The history of this dynasty is obscure.
In 1972, the two states fought a war.
In early 1995, the government of Yemen launched an economic, financial, and administrative reform program (EFARP) with the support of the World Bank and the IMF, as well as international donors.
Yemen's portion of the Rub al Khali desert in the east is much lower, generally below , and receives almost no rain.
Car bombings outside the U.S. embassy in Sana'a killed 18 people, including six of the assailants in September 2008.
Yemen was thought to be the strongest competitor, but was defeated in the first three matches of the tournament.
The revolution in the north coincided with the Aden Emergency, which hastened the end of British rule in the south.
According to Philostorgius, the mission was resisted by local Jews.
The latest addition to Yemen's list of World Heritage Sites is the Socotra Archipelago.
In 1876, the Hashid and Bakil tribes rebelled against the Ottomans; the Turks had to appease them with gifts to end the uprising.
Administration of Yemen has long been notoriously difficult.
Imam al-Mutahhar launched a propaganda campaign in which he claimed contact with prophet Mohammed in a dream advising him to wage ''jihad'' against the Ottomans.
A second key challenge is a high level of poverty, making it difficult to recover the costs of service provision.
The Ayyubid army was defeated in Dhamar in 1226.
The Zaydi imam did not recognize the Anglo-Ottoman border agreement of 1905 on the grounds that it was made between two foreign powers occupying Yemen.
He later installed the Zurayids to govern Aden.
The northern tribes united under the leadership of the House of Hamidaddin in 1890.
The coalition included the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Qatar, Bahrain, Jordan, Morocco, Sudan, Egypt, and Pakistan.
The Mamluk victory turned out to be short-lived.
Queen Arwa moved the seat of the Sulayhid dynasty from Sana'a to Jibla, a small town in central Yemen near Ibb.
However, no direct reference to Judaism or Yathrib was discovered from his lengthy reign.
Imam al-Nasir Hassan was arrested in 1585 and exiled to Constantinople, thereby putting an end to the Yemeni rebellion.
Al-Kindi, known by his nickname "Talib al-Haqq" (seeker of truth), established the first Ibadi state in the history of Islam, but was killed in Taif around 749 AD.
Cotton and many fruit trees are also grown, with mangoes being the most valuable.
By 1565, Yemen was split into two provinces, the highlands under the command of Ridvan Pasha and Tihama under Murad Pasha.
By the third century BC, Qataban, Hadramout, and Ma'in became independent from Saba and established themselves in the Yemeni arena.
Islam spread quickly in the seventh century and Yemenite troops were crucial in the expansion of the early Islamic conquests.
The government has committed to reduce illiteracy to less than 10% by 2025.
, Shi'a Houthis are fighting against the Islamic State, Al Qaeda, and Saudi Arabia.
After the rise of labour unions, a rift was apparent between the sectors of workers and the first signs of resistance to the occupation started in 1943.
Imam Abdullah bin Hamza proclaimed the imamate in 1197 and fought al-Mu'izz Ismail, the Ayyubid Sultan of Yemen.
Under the rule of President Ali Abdullah Saleh, Yemen was described as a kleptocracy.
Saudi Arabia and Egypt would not rule out ground operations.
Meanwhile, a succession of slaves held power in Zabid and continued to govern in the name of their masters, eventually establishing their own dynasty around 1022 or 1050 according to different sources.
Abdullah bin Hamza carried on the struggle against the Ayyubid until his death in 1217.
A series of bomb attacks occurred on police, official, diplomatic, foreign business, and tourism targets in 2008.
Ibn Saud suppressed the Asiri rebellion in 1933, after which the Idrsids fled to Sana'a.
Yousef avenged his people with great cruelty.
The country also hosts many football clubs.
The U.S. launched a series of drone attacks in Yemen to curb a perceived growing terror threat due to political chaos in Yemen.
Saleh returned in February 2012.
By 1608, Imam al-Mansur (the victorious) regained control over the highlands and signed a truce for 10 years with the Ottomans.
Strabo's close relationship with Aelius Gallus led him to attempt to justify his friend's defeat in his writings.
Yemen's biggest sports event was hosting the 2010 Gulf Cup of Nations in Aden and Abyan in the southern part of the country on 22 November 2010.
A high percentage of Yemen plants belong to tropical African plants of Sudanian regions.
Yemen's mountains provide many opportunities for outdoor sports, such as biking, rock climbing, trekking, hiking, mountain jumping, and other more challenging sports, including mountain climbing.
Yemen is part of homeland of the South Semitic languages.
The geography and ruling imams of North Yemen kept the country isolated from foreign influence before 1962.
Imam al-Mutahhar assassinated the Ottoman colonial governor and recaptured Sana'a, but the Ottomans, led by Özdemir Pasha, forced al-Mutahhar to retreat to his fortress in Thula.
Most of the support for the NLO came from Radfan and Yafa, so the British launched Operation Nutcracker which had the complete burning of Radfan in January 1964.
'''Yemen''' (;  ''''), officially known as the '''Republic of Yemen''' ( ''''), is an Arab country in Western Asia, occupying South Arabia, the southern end of the Arabian Peninsula.
Parliamentary elections were held in April 2003, and the General People's Congress  maintained an absolute majority.
Saleh became Yemen's first directly elected president in the 1999 presidential election, winning 96.2% of the vote.
The government developed the National Basic Education Development Strategy in 2003 that aimed at providing education to 95% of Yemeni children between the ages of six and 14 years and also at decreasing the gap between males and females in urban and rural areas.
The following month, the Houthis dissolved parliament and declared a Revolutionary Committee under Mohammed Ali al-Houthi to be the interim authority in Yemen.
In 1927, Imam Yahya's forces were 50&nbsp;km away from Aden, Taiz, and Ibb, and were bombed by the British for five days; the imam had to pull back.
In 2001,  violence surrounded  a referendum which apparently supported extending Saleh's rule and powers.
Sabaean Mukarrib Karib'il Watar I conquered the entire realm of Awsan, and expanded Sabaean rule and territory to include much of South Arabia.
Al-Mu'ayyad Muhammad expelled the Ottomans from Sana'a in 1628, only Zabid and Mocha remained under Ottoman possession.
However, the Rasulid capitals were Zabid and Taiz.
Yemen was in turmoil as Sana'a became a battlefield for the three dynasties, as well as independent tribes.
Saudi Arabia actively aided the south during the 1994 civil war.
Religion in Yemen consists primarily of two principal Islamic religious groups: 60%–65% of the Muslim population is Sunni and 35%–40% is Shia, according to the International Religious Freedom Report.
In May, dozens were killed in clashes between troops and tribal fighters in Sana'a.
Rivalries and disturbances continued among the Zaydi imams, between them and their deputies, with the ulema, with the heads of tribes, as well as with those who belonged to other sects.
After the Ottoman departure in 1918, he sought to recapture the lands of his Qasimid ancestors.
The Zaidis are predominantly in the north and northwest whilst the Ismailis are in the main centers such as Sana'a and Ma'rib.
In February 1989, North Yemen joined Iraq, Jordan, and Egypt in forming the Arab Cooperation Council (ACC), an organization created partly in response to the founding of the Gulf Cooperation Council and intended to foster closer economic cooperation and integration among its members.
Shias are primarily Zaidi and also have significant minorities of Twelver and Ismaili Shias.
Imam Abdullah was defeated at first, but was able to conquer Sana'a and Dhamar in 1198 al-Mu'izz Ismail was assassinated in 1202.
By this point, Saleh began to lose international support.
According to the U.S. State Department International Religious Freedom Report 2007, "Some Zaydis reported harassment and discrimination by the Government because they were suspected of sympathizing with the al-Houthis.
This area, now heavily terraced to meet the demand for food, receives the highest rainfall in Arabia, rapidly increasing from  per year to about  in Taiz and over  in Ibb.
The Saudi – Yemen barrier was constructed by Saudi Arabia against an influx of illegal immigrants and against the smuggling of drugs and weapons.
There have been Yemeni productions of plays by Arab authors such as Tawfiq al-Hakim and Saadallah Wannous and by Western authors, including Shakespeare, Pirandello, Brecht, and Tennessee Williams.
During these tensions, both the northern and southern armies (which had never integrated) gathered on their respective frontiers.
Then they handed it over to their Idrisi allies.
They held sway mainly in the southern coastal region, particularly around Zabid, Mocha, and Aden.
The coastline stretches for about .
It is the 30th highest in the world.
For example, China and the United States are involved with the expansion of the Sana'a International Airport.
Under the 1991 constitution, an elected President, an elected 301-seat Assembly of Representatives, and an appointed 111-member Shura Council share power.
With its long sea border between eastern and western civilizations, Yemen has long existed at a crossroads of cultures with a strategic location in terms of trade on the west of the Arabian Peninsula.
According to 2009 estimates, life expectancy in Yemen is 63.27 years.
Human Rights Watch reported on discrimination and violence against women as well as on the abolition of the minimum marriage age of fifteen for women.
The Yemeni army launched a fresh offensive against the Shia insurgents in 2009, assisted by Saudi forces.
Saba is believed to be biblical Sheba and was the most prominent federation.
Prolonged pretrial detention is a serious problem, and judicial corruption, inefficiency, and executive interference undermine due process.
The groundwater has not been regulated by Yemen's governments.
Hadi took office for a two-year term upon winning the uncontested presidential elections in February 2012, in which he was the only candidate standing.
Phase two will address structural issues such as civil service reform.
It is reported that Byzantium Emperor Justin I sent a letter to the Aksumite King Kaleb, pressuring him to "attack the abominable Hebrew".
The cultural heritage of Socotra includes the unique Soqotri language.
The Saudi payments have been intended to facilitate the tribes' autonomy from the Yemeni government and to give the Saudi government a mechanism with which to weigh in on Yemen's political decision-making.
In October 2000, 17 U.S. personnel died after a suicide attack on the U.S. naval vessel USS ''Cole'' in Aden which was subsequently blamed on al-Qaeda.
The Soviet and Chinese Aid Missions established in 1958 and 1959 were the first important non-Muslim presences in North Yemen.
Estimates of the number of Christians in Yemen range from 25,000 to 41,000.
It is home to 192 bird species, 253 species of coral, 730 species of coastal fish, and 300 species of crab and lobster, as well as a range of ''Aloes'' and the Dragon's Blood Tree (''Dracaena cinnabari'').
Emperor Justinian I sent an embassy to Yemen.
The Ottoman Empire conquered Egypt, hanging the last Mamluk Sultan in Cairo.
For example, in Sana'a, the water table was 30 meters below surface in the 1970s but had dropped to 1200 meters below surface by 2012.
The unified air forces and air defenses are now under one command.
It also has large proven reserves of natural gas.
Hassan Pasha was appointed governor of Yemen and enjoyed a period of relative peace from 1585 to 1597.
This federal proposal was a contributing factor toward the Houthis' subsequent coup d'état against the government.
As a result of the Yemeni revolution, the constitution of Yemen is expected to be rewritten, and then new elections held in 2014.
The Yemeni government alleged that the Houthis were seeking to overthrow it and to implement ''Shī'a'' religious law.
They never exercised control over the highlands and Hadramawt, and did not control more than a coastal strip of the Yemen (Tihama) bordering the Red Sea.
The informal political settlement was held together by a power-sharing deal between three men: president Ali Abdullah Saleh, who controlled the state; Major General Ali Mohsen al-Ahmar, who controlled the largest share of the Republic of Yemen Armed Forces; and Abdullah ibn Husayn al-Ahmar, figurehead of the Islamist Islah party and Saudi Arabia's chosen broker of transnational patronage payments to various political players, including tribal sheikhs.
The Ottomans sent yet another expeditionary force to Zabid in 1547, while Imam al-Mutawakkil Yahya Sharaf ad-Din was ruling the highlands independently.
Upon signing the document, he agreed to legally transfer the office and powers of the presidency to his deputy, Vice President Abd Rabbuh Mansur Hadi.
A major reorganization of the armed forces continues.
A big problem in Yemen is the cultivation of Khat, a mild narcotic plant that releases a stimulant when chewed, and accounts for up to 40 percent of the water drawn from the Sana'a Basin each year, and that figure is rising.
The central government in Sana'a remained weak, staving off challenges from southern separatists and Shia rebels as well as AQAP.
The Tihamah ends abruptly at the escarpment of the western highlands.
Yemen has acceded to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.
Instead, they established various colonies to control trade routes.
Even before the revolution, Yemen's water situation had been described  as increasingly dire by experts who worried that Yemen would be the "first country to run out of water".
Most emigrated to Israel in the mid-20th century, following the Jewish exodus from Arab lands and Operation Magic Carpet.
Services, industry, construction and commerce together constitute less than 25% of the labor force.
Lack of water in the Arabian Peninsula prevented the Sabaeans from unifying the entire peninsula.
Haines bombarded Aden from his warship in January 1839.
The history of Yemeni theatre dates back at least a century, to the early 1900s.
