For the following 3 centuries, it remained, with brief intermissions, under the Iranian rule.
Erebuni was "designed as a great administrative and religious centre, a fully royal capital."
* Armavir (4), Gyumri (2);
Thus, on 28 May 1918, the Dashnak leader Aram Manukian declared the independence of Armenia.
*Armenian State University of Economics (ASUE, 1975)
In 1881, The Yerevan Teachers' Seminary was opened.
All three bodies cooperate to maintain law in the city.
The territory was named after a Turkic leader known as ''Emir Saad''.
Passengers need to pay the money directly to the driver when getting out from vehicle.
The Blue Mosque serves primarily Shia Iranian visitors.
The headquarters of the Chess Federation of Armenia is located in the Tigran Petrosian Chess House of Yerevan.
Some old Soviet-era trolleybuses have been replaced with comparably new ones.
While looking in the direction of Yerevan, after the ark had landed on Mount Ararat and the flood waters had receded, Noah is believed to have exclaimed, "Yerevats!"
The wars of Iskander and his eventual defeat against the Timurids, invited further destruction in Armenia, as many more Armenians were taken captive and sold into slavery and the land was subjected to outright pillaging, forcing many of them to leave the region.
Archaeological evidence, such as a cuneiform inscription, indicates that the Urartian military fortress of ''Erebuni'' (Էրեբունի) was founded in 782 BC by the orders of King Argishti I at the site of modern-day Yerevan, to serve as a fort and citadel guarding against attacks from the north Caucasus.
Above-mentioned total 119 bus and mini-van lines are operated by about 60 private operators.
French traveler Jean-Baptiste Tavernier, who visited Yerevan possibly up to six times between 1631 and 1668, states that the city is exclusively populated by Armenians.
The population of Yerevan fell from 1,250,000 in 1989 to 1,103,488 in 2001 and to 1,091,235 in 2003.
*Armenian State Institute of Physical Culture (ASIPC, 1945)
A northeastern extension of the line with two new stations is currently being developed.
On 27 September 2004, Yerevan adopted an anthem, "Erebuni-Yerevan", written by Paruyr Sevak and composed by Edgar Hovhanisyan.
Since the independence, "Erebuni" is mainly used for military or private flights.
The monumental  church of Saint Gregory the Illuminator was opened in 1900.
The Satrapy of Armenia was divided into two parts: the northern part and the southern part, with the cities of Erebuni (Yerevan) and Tushpa (Van) as their centres, respectively.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, due to economic crises, thousands fled Armenia, mostly to Russia, North America and Europe.
However, this peaceful period was shattered with the rise of Qara Iskander between 1420 and 1436, who reportedly made Armenia a "desert" and subjected it to "devastation and plunder, to slaughter, and captivity".
In 658 AD, at the height of the Arab Islamic invasions, Erebuni-Yerevan was conquered during the Muslim conquest of Persia, as it was part of Persian-ruled Armenia.
The QSI International School, École Française Internationale en Arménie, Ayb School, Mkhitar Sebastatsi Educational Complex and Khoren and Shooshanig Avedisian School are among the prominent international or private schools in Yerevan.
Founded in 1921, the National Gallery of Armenia and the History Museum of Armenia are Yerevan's principal museums.
In 1968, the city's 2,750th anniversary was commemorated.
In 1840, the Armenian Oblast was dissolved and its territory incorporated into a new larger province; the Georgia-Imeretia Governorate.
Other significant theatres include: Sundukyan State Academic Theatre, Paronyan Musical Comedy Theatre, Stanislavski Russian Theatre, Drama and Comedy Theatre named after Edgar Elbakyan, Hrachya Ghaplanyan Drama Theatre, Yerevan State Hamazgayin Theatre and Hovhannes Tumanyan Puppet Theatre.
In 1902, a railway line linked Yerevan with Alexandropol, Tiflis and Julfa.
The Armenian capital was chosen for the quality and variety of the programme it presented to the selection committee, which met at UNESCO’s headquarters in Paris on 2 July 2010.
This law is currently in preparation in the Armenian parliament that adopted its first draft in December 2007 and should do the same in the second draft in spring of 2008.
Yerevan prides itself on having connections 24/7 as taxis are available at any time of the day or night.
The events resulted in ten deaths and a subsequent 20-day state of emergency declared by President Robert Kocharyan.
Muslims were either sedentary, semi-sedentary, or nomadic.
, the city dominates over 85% of the annual total services in Armenia, as well as over 84% of the annual total retail trade.
Food products include processed meat, all types of canneries, wheat and flour, sweets and chocolate, dried fruits, soft drinks and beverages.
Most of the educational, cultural and scientific institutions were centred in the Kentron district.
On 26 May 1919, the government passed a law to open the Yerevan State University, which was located on the main Astafyan (now Abovyan) street of Yerevan.
Even though the economic crisis of the '90s ravaged the industry of the country, several factories remain always in service, notably in the petrochemical and the aluminium sectors.
Armenian beverages, especially Armenian cognac and beer, have a worldwide fame.
The one-way trip cost is fixed and is 100 AMD (about 20 cents) for all buses and mini-vans, while 50 AMD for trolleybuses.
At the beginning of the 20th century, Yerevan city's population was over 29,000.
The summers are usually very hot with the temperature in August reaching up to , and winters generally carry snowfall and freezing temperatures with January often being as cold as  and lower.
During the height of the Urartian power, irrigation canals and an artificial reservoirs were built in Erebuni and its surrounding territories.
On 2 December 1920, Yerevan along with the other territories of the Republic of Armenia, became part of the Soviet Union, known as the Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic.
Yerevan served as the seat of the newly formed Armenian Oblast between 1828 and 1840.
It comprises a memorial stone made of three parts, the latter of which is dedicated to the intellectual and political figures who, as the museum's site says, "raised their protest against the Genocide committed against the Armenians by the Turks.
Due to the Turkish and Azerbaijani blockades of Armenia, there is only one international train that passes by once every two days, with neighboring Georgia being its destination.
The city was renamed Yerevan (Ереван) in 1936.
One theory regarding the origin of Yerevan's name is the city was named after the Armenian king, Yervand (Orontes) IV, the last leader of the Orontid Dynasty, and founder of the city of Yervandashat.
The tramway network that operated in Yerevan since 1906 was decommissioned in January 2004.
In addition, each administrative district of Yerevan has its own public library (usually more than one library).
Armenians mainly occupied the Kond neighbourhood of Yerevan and the rural suburbs around the city.
The church was consecrated on 6 December 1827 and named the Church of the Intercession of the Holy Mother of God.
A variety of other minor religious communities are also present in the city.
The most played and popular sport in Yerevan is football.
In addition to the national police and road police, Yerevan has its own municipal police.
*Charents Museum of Literature and Arts, is a biographical museum of poet Yeghishe Charents, located on Aram Street.
Since 2004, the Moscow Cinema hosts annual the Golden Apricot international film festival.
Only a few structures were preserved, mainly in the portion that extends from Abovyan Street to Mashtots Avenue.
The Federation, however, was short-lived.
At the period, Yerevan was a small town with narrow roads and alleys, including the central quarter of ''Shahar'', the ''Ghantar'' commercial centre, and the residential neighbourhoods of Kond, Dzoragyugh, Nork and Shentagh.
In addition to having a permanent exposition of works of Armenian painters, the gallery houses a collection of paintings, drawings and sculptures issued from German, American, Austrian, Belgian, Spanish, French, Hungarian, Italian, Dutch, Russian and Swiss artists.
Zacharia Gevorkian opened Yerevan's first printing house in 1874, and the first theatre 1879.
The city itself was mainly populated by Armenians.
In 1582-1583, the Ottomans led by Serdar Ferhad Pasha took brief control over Yerevan.
In 2007, the capital had 1,107,800 inhabitants.
However, the population of Yerevan has been increasing since.
Within the years, the central Kentron district has become the most developed area in Yerevan, something that created a significant gap compared with other districts in the city.
It is located on to the edge of the Hrazdan River, northeast of the Ararat plain (Ararat Valley), to the center-west of the country.
Another national library of Yerevan is the Khnko Aper Children's Library, founded in 1933.
Pyunik also operate their own training academy located in the Kentron district, while the training academy of Ararat Yerevan is located in Dzoraghbyur at the eastern outskirts of Yerevan.
In 1996, despite the severe economic conditions in the country, Yerevan hosted the 32nd Chess Olympiad.
*International Accountancy Training Center (IATC, 1998)
However, it is likely that the city's name is derived from the Urartian military fortress of Erebuni (Էրեբունի), which was founded on the territory of modern-day Yerevan in 782 BC by Argishti I.
Subsequently, Yerevan became the capital and the center of the newly founded Republic of Armenia, although the members of the Armenian National Council were yet to stay in Tiflis until their arrival in Yerevan to form the government in the summer of the same year.
As a consequence, Yerevan significantly lost its Armenian population who had declined to 20%, while Muslims including Persians, Turks, Kurds and Tatars gained dominance with around 80% of the city's population.
Outside the bus lines that cover the city, some buses at the start of the central road train station located in the Nor Kilikia neighborhood serve practically all the cities of Armenia as well as of others abroad, notably Tbilisi in Georgia or Tabriz in Iran.
During the period of the Arsacid kings, Erebuni was only recorded in a Manichaean text of the 3rd century, where it is mentioned that one of the disciples of the prophet Mani founded a Manichaean community near the Christian community in Erebuni.
After the signing of the Treaty of Sèvres in 1920, Armenia was granted formal international recognition.
In 1887, the Tairyan's wine and brandy factory was inaugurated.
*Yerevan History Museum, founded in 1931, reopened in 2005 adjacent to the new complex of the Yerevan City Hall.
According to Yerevan Municipality office, in future, marshrutkas should be replaced by buses.
Between 522 BC and 331 BC, Erebuni was one of the main centers of the Satrapy of Armenia, a region controlled by the Orontid Dynasty as one of the satrapies of the Achaemenid Empire.
Other notable museums include
The city has a majority of luxury hotels, modern restaurants, bars, pubs and nightclubs.
After the Mongols captured Ani in 1236, Armenia turned into a Mongol protectorate as part of the Ilkhanate, and the Zakarids became vassals to the Mongols.
Ashot I liberated Yerevan in 850, and  was recognized as the Prince of Princes of Armenia by the Abbasid Caliph al-Musta'in in 862.
There are several number of suburb trains to:
*Komitas Museum, founded as an art and biographical museum in 2015, located near the Komitas Pantheon.
Until the fall of the Soviet Union, the majority of the population of Yerevan were Armenians with minorities of Russians, Kurds, Azerbaijanis and Iranians present as well.
Hence, Yerevan is home to many leading enterprises of Armenia and the Caucasus for the production of alcoholic beverages, such as the Yerevan Brandy Company, Yerevan Ararat Wine Factory, "Yerevan Kilikia" brewery and "Yerevan Champagne Wines Factory".
Historically, the city is situated at the heart of the Armenian Highland, in Kotayk canton ( ''Kotayk gavar'', not to be confused with the current Kotayk Province) of Ayrarat province, within Armenia Major.
The National Archives of Armenia founded in 1923, is a scientific research centre and depositary, with a collection of around 3.5 million units of valuable documents.
The territory of Yerevan was settled approximately during the 4th millennium BC, fortified settlements from the Bronze Age include Shengavit, Tsitsernakaberd, Teishebaini, Arin Berd and Berdadzor.
Scholar Margarit Israelyan notes these changes when comparing inscriptions found on two cuneiform tablets at Erebuni:
In 2008, unrest in the capital between the authorities and opposition demonstrators led by ex-President Levon Ter-Petrosyan occurred after the 2008 Armenian presidential election.
Thus, the ethnic makeup of Yerevan became more monoethnic during the first 3 decades in the Soviet Union.
During the 1840s and the 1850s, many schools were opened in the city.
In 1913, for the first time in the city, a telephone line with eighty subscribers became operational.
Thus, with the dominance of cities such as Artaxata and Tigranocerta, Erebuni had significantly lost its importance as a central city.
The first football venue ever built in Yerevan is the Armenia Sports Stadium, opened in 1930.
The Artaxiads considered Erebuni and Tushpa as cities of Persian heritage.
Yerevan played a key role in the Armenian national democratic movement that emerged during the Gorbachev era of the 1980s.
The metro stations had most of their names changed after the collapse of the Soviet Union and the Independence of the Republic of Armenia.
The 18th-century Blue Mosque of Yerevan was restored and reopened in the 1990s, with Iranian funding, and is currently the only active mosque in Armenia.
The city is home to many movie theatres including the Moscow Cinema, Nairi Cinema, Hayastan Cinema, Cinema Star multiplex cinemas of the Dalma Garden Mall, and the KinoPark multiplex cinemas of Yerevan Mall.
According to ''Ashkharatsuyts'', Erebuni was part of the Kotayk canton (Կոտայք գավառ, ''Kotayk gavar'', not to be confused with the current Kotayk Province) of Ayrarat province, within '''Armenia Major'''.
The capital Yerevan was part of the ''Araratian Province''.
In the past few years, the city centre has also witnessed major road reconstruction, and the renovation of the Republic square, funded by the American-Armenian billionaire Kirk Kerkorian.
The Yerevan Botanical Garden opened in 1935 is one of the largest parks in the city along with the Victory park and the Circular Park.
Religious services resumed in it in 1991, and in 2004 a cupola and a belfry were added to the church.
*Crisis Management State Academy (CMSA, 1999)
As a result of the Ottoman invasion, the ''Erivan Beglarbegi'' of the Safavids was dissolved.
The train station is made in Soviet-style architecture with its long point on the building roof, representing the symbols of communism: red star, hammer and sickle.
In the late medieval and early modern periods, when Yerevan was under Turkic and later Persian rule the city was known in Farsi as Iravân ().
Many subsidiaries of Russian service companies and banks operate in Yerevan, including "Gazprom Armenia", "Rosgosstrakh Armenia", VTB Bank Armenia and Areximbank of the Gazprombank Group.
During the centuries long Iranian rule over Eastern Armenia that lasted from the early 16th century up to 1828, it was the center of Iran's Erivan khanate administrative division from 1736.
Yerevan was named the 2012 World Book Capital by UNESCO.
The Armenia Marriott Hotel is situated in the heart of the city at Republic Square, while the Radisson Blu Hotel Yerevan is located near the Victory Park.
* Yeraskh (1), Ararat (2);
*Yerevan State University (YSU, 1919)
*British School of Business Armenia (BSB Armenia, 2014)
The city was officially known as Erivan () under Russian rule during the 19th and early 20th centuries.
During the last quarter of the 14th century, the Ag Qoyunlu Sunni Oghuz Turkic tribe took over Armenia, including Yerevan.
In 2006, the four members from Yerevan of the Armenian chess team won the 37th Chess Olympiad in Turin and repeated the feat at the 38th Chess Olympiad in Dresden.
During the rule of the Bagratuni dynasty of Armenia between 885 and 1045, Yerevan was relatively a secure part of the Kingdom before falling to the Byzantines.
, the city is home to 263 schools, of which 220 are state-owned (169 run by the municipality and 51 run by the ministry of education), and 43 are private.
The public universities of Yerevan include:
Up until the mid-1970s the city's name was spelled Erevan, more often than Yerevan, in English sources.
This was the 2nd major territorial loss for the Qajars, after the irrevocable loss of what is modern-day Georgia, Dagestan, and most of the contemporary Republic of Azerbaijan in favour of Russia as a result of the Treaty of Gulistan of 1813.
The emblem is a rectangular shield with a blue border.
Due to its strategic significance, Yerevan was initially often fought over, and passed back and forth, between the dominion of the rivaling Iranian and Ottoman Empire, until it permanently became controlled by the Safavids.
In 1905, the grandnephew of Napoleon I; prince Louis Joseph Jérôme Napoléon (1864–1932) was appointed as governor of Yerevan province.
With the rise of the Artaxiad dynasty of Armenia who seized power in 189 BC, the Kingdom of Armenia greatly expanded to include major territories of Asia Minor, Atropatene, Iberia, Phoenicia and Syria.
*Northern University of Yerevan (1996)
HSBC Armenia is also headquartered in Yerevan.
On 29 January 2010, another major project "Yerevan City" was announced by the municipality of Yerevan, to build a new cultural businesslike centre near the hill of Paskevich, where the Noragyugh neighborhood is located.
The famous Soviet clown Leonid Yengibarian was one of the prominent actors of the Yerevan circus between 1959 and 1971.
Roughly $1.8&nbsp;billion was spent on such construction in 2006, according to the national statistical service.
Armenia became a Christian nation in the early 4th century, during the reign of the Arsacid king Tiridates III.
Inaugurated in 1961 during the Soviet era, Zvartnots airport was renovated for the first time in 1985 and a second time in 2002 in order to adapt to international norms.
*Fondation Université Française en Arménie (UFAR, 1995)
Following a brief period of Ottoman rule over Eastern Armenia between 1724 and 1736, and as a result of  the fall of the Safavid dynasty in 1736, Yerevan along with the adjacent territories became part of the newly formed administrative territory of Erivan Khanate under the Afsharid dynasty of Iran, which encompassed an area encompassing 15,000&nbsp;km².
Yerevan had also opened representatives in Great Britain, Italy, Germany, Serbia, Greece, Iran and Japan.
In 1410, Armenia fell under the control of the Kara Koyunlu Shia Oghuz Turkic tribe.
, the population of Yerevan was 1,060,138, just over 35% of the Republic of Armenia's total population.
At the beginning of the 20th century, Yerevan was a small city with a population of 30,000.
Dinamo and Mika indoor arenas are regular venues for the domestic and regional competitions of basketball, volleyball, handball and futsal.
Yerevan experiences an average of 2,700 sunlight hours per year.
Catholicos Gevorg V ordered that church bells peal for 6 days as Armenians from all walks of life &ndash; peasants, poets, blacksmiths, and even the clergymen &ndash; rallied to form organized military units.
*Yerevan Brusov State University of Languages and Social Sciences (Brusov, 1935)
During the same year, the Yerevan Brewere was opened as well.
Other major public libraries include the Avetik Isahakyan Central Library founded in 1935, the Republican Library of Medical Sciences founded in 1939, the Library of Science and Technology founded in 1957, and the Musical Library founded in 1965.
This train then continues to its destination of Batumi, on the shores of the Black sea in the summer season.
Other cinemas with notable architectural value include  the Hayrenik Cinema,  and Rossiya Cinema.
The principal symbol of Yerevan is Mount Ararat, which is visible from any area in the capital.
In 1724, the Erivan Fortress was besieged by the Ottoman army.
It went through a facelift starting in 2004 with the construction of a new terminal.
*Armenian National Agrarian University (ANAU, 1930)
Other major chains present in central Yerevan include the Royal Tulip Yerevan Hotel, the Best Western Congress Hotel, the DoubleTree by Hilton and the Hyatt Place.
Another long term project is the construction of two new lines, but these have been suspended due to lack of finance.
*Yerevan Mall, opened in February 2014 on Arshakunyats Avenue and is home to the first Carrefour hypermarket in Armenia.
Banants run their own training centre-academy located in the Malatia-Sebastia district.
Downtown houses deemed too small are increasingly demolished and replaced by high-rise buildings.
By the time of Nicholas I's visit in 1837, Yerevan had become an uyezd.
*Yerevan Circus: opened in 1956 in the centre of Yerevan.
After the fall of the Ilkhanate in the mid-14th century, the Zakarid princes ruled over Lori, Shirak and Ararat plain until 1360 when they fell to the invading Turkic tribes.
*National University of Architecture and Construction of Armenia (NUACA, 1921)
*ARF History Museum, commemorates the history of the Armenian Revolutionary Federation and its notable members.
The population of the Erivan Fortress, founded in the 1580s, was mainly composed of Muslim soldiers, estimated two to three thousand.
*European Regional Academy (ERA, 2002)
The second wave of repatriation occurred from 1946 to 1948, when about 100,000 ethnic Armenians from Iran, Syria, Lebanon, Greece, Bulgaria, Romania, Cyprus, Palestine, Iraq, Egypt, France, United States etc.
The Russians sponsored the resettlement process of the Armenian population from Persia and Turkey.
The "Megerian Carpet" factory is the leading in this sector.
The interiors of the stations resemble that of the former western Soviet nations, with chandeliers hanging from the corridors.
The National Library of Armenia located on Teryan Street of Yerevan, is the public library of the city and the entire republic.
The time of the end of the project has not yet been defined.
, 64 higher education institutions are accredited and licensed to operate in the Republic of Armenia.
The first phase of the construction ended in September 2006 with the opening of the arrivals zone.
The municipality runs 159 kindergartens.
Yerevan is served by the Zvartnots International Airport, located  west of the city center.
In a few decades, Yerevan was transformed from a provincial town within the Russian Empire, to Armenia's principal cultural, artistic, and industrial center, as well as becoming the seat of national government.
After the capture of Yerevan by Russians as result of the Russo-Persian War, the main mosque in the fortress, built by the invading Turks in 1582, was converted into an Orthodox church under the orders of the Russian commander, general Ivan Paskevich.
In 1991 with the independence of Armenia, Yerevan continued with its status as the political and cultural centre of the country, being home to all the national institutions: the Government house, the Parliament, ministries, the presidential palace, the constitutional court, judicial bodies and other public organisations.
The front gardens showcase sculptures from Gerard Cafesjian's collection.
A second section designated for departures was inaugurated in May 2007.
Other parks in Yerevan include: the English Park of the 1860s, the Buenos Aires Park and Tumanyan Park in Ajapnyak, Komitas park in Shengavit, Vahan Zatikian park in Malatia-Sebastia, David Anhaght park in Kanaker-Zeytun, the Family park in Avan, Fridtjof Nansen park in Nor Nork and the Lyon Park in Erebuni.
Other major plants in the city include the "Nairit" chemical and rubber plant, Rusal Armenal aluminium foil mill, "Grand Candy" Armenian-Canadian confectionery manufacturers, "Arcolad" chocolate factory, "Marianna" factory for dairy products, "Talgrig Group" for wheat and flour products, "Shant" ice cream factory, "Crown Chemicals" for paints, "ATMC" travertine mining company, Yerevan Watch Factory "AWI watches", Yerevan Jewellry Plant, and the mineral water factories of "Arzni", "Sil", and "Dilijan Frolova".
Currently, Armenia has 3 mobile phone service providers: Armentel's Beeline, K-Telecom's Vicacel-MTS, and Orange Armenia.
According to Ivan Chopin, there were eight mosques in Yerevan in the middle of the 19th century.
In September 2015, the newly-built Olympic Training Complex of Yerevan was opened in Davtashen.
The construction of the first station (''Ajapnyak'') and of the one kilometer tunnel linking it to the rest of the network will cost 18&nbsp;million USD.
Other prominent universities in Yerevan include:
Currently there are no national airlines operating in Armenia.
In 1501, most of the Eastern Armenian territories including Yereven were swiftly conquered by the emerging Safavid dynasty of Iran led by Shah Ismail I.
