May a good day come to him who carries this prayer book into the synagogue.
Many secular Zionists wanted Hebrew as the sole language of Jews, to contribute to a national cohesive identity.
The national languages of Israel are Hebrew and Arabic.
In 1975, the film ''Hester Street'', much of which is in Yiddish, was released.
In addition, some prayers, such as the Got fun Avrohom, were composed and are recited in Yiddish.
Dovid Katz proposes that Yiddish emerged from contact between speakers of High German and Aramaic-speaking Jews from the Middle East.
However, according to linguist Ghil'ad Zuckermann, the members of this group in particular, and the Hebrew revival in general, did not succeed in uprooting Yiddish patterns (as well as the patterns of other European languages Jewish immigrants spoke) within what he calls "Israeli", i.e.
Recent linguistic research has finessed, contested, or challenged the Weinreich model, providing alternative approaches to the origins of Yiddish.
In 2009, the number of native speakers among these was estimated by linguist Mikael Parkvall to be 750-1,500.
In the six years since the 2000 census, the 2006 American Community Survey reflected an estimated 15 percent decline of people speaking Yiddish at home in the U.S. to 152,515.
Modern Yiddish has two major forms.
However, the number of speakers within the widely dispersed Orthodox (mainly Hasidic) communities is now increasing.
Other schools which offer Yiddish programs include Tel Aviv University, University of Buenos Aires, University of Michigan, Brandeis University, Monash University, Australian Centre for Jewish Civilisation, University College London, University of Oxford, University of Maryland, YIVO, New York University, Hampshire College campus at Amherst (home of the National Yiddish Book Center), Binghamton University, Harvard University, Stanford University, University of Pennsylvania, Indiana University, Bloomington, The Ohio State University, University of Düsseldorf, University of Chicago, Columbia University, Vassar College, UMass Amherst, McGill University, UCLA, Emory University in Atlanta, University of Virginia, the University of Manitoba, Lund University and the University of Sao Paulo, in Brazil.
There were also from time to time Yiddish newspapers in Manchester, Liverpool, Glasgow and Leeds.
Eastern Yiddish differs from Western both by its far greater size and by the extensive inclusion of words of Slavic origin.
Ashkenaz bordered on the area inhabited by another distinctive Jewish cultural group, the Sephardim or Spanish Jews, which ranged into southern France.
On the eve of World War II, there were 11 to 13 million Yiddish speakers.
Also in New Jersey Yiddish is widely spoken mostly in Lakewood, but also in smaller towns with yeshivos, such as Passaic, Teaneck, and elsewhere.
In addition, there was probably widespread illiteracy in the non-Hebrew script, with the level of illiteracy in the non-Jewish communities being even higher.
Thriving Yiddish theater, especially in the New York City Yiddish Theater District, kept the language vital.
Located in Kraków, the Galicia Jewish Museum offers classes in Yiddish Language Instruction and workshops on Yiddish Songs.
Traces remain in the contemporary Yiddish vocabulary: for example,  (''bentshn'', to bless), from the Latin '''';  (''leyenen'', to read), from the Latin ''''; and the personal names אַנשל Anshl, cognate to Angel or Angelo; בונים Bunim (probably from "bon homme").
The remaining states with speaker populations larger than 1,000 are Pennsylvania (5,445), Ohio (1,925), Michigan (1,945), Massachusetts (2,380), Maryland (2,125), Illinois (3,510), Connecticut (1,710), and Arizona (1,055).
Around five million of those killed—85 percent of the Jews who died in the Holocaust—were speakers of Yiddish.
(i. e. "Moses German")—declined in the 18th century, as the Enlightenment and the ''Haskalah'' led to a view of Yiddish as a corrupt dialect.
It was not until the mid- to late 19th century, as first German, then Eastern European, Jews arrived in the nation, that Yiddish became dominant within the immigrant community.
It remains in wide distribution, together with  (''der algemeyner zhurnal'' – Algemeiner Journal; ''algemeyner'' = general), a Lubavitcher newspaper which is also published weekly and appears online.
Yiddish was Montreal's third language (after French and English) for the entire first half of the twentieth century.
In Weinreich's view, this Old Yiddish substrate later bifurcated into two distinct versions of the language, Western and Eastern Yiddish.
In 2011, the number of persons in the United States above the age of 5 speaking Yiddish at home was 160,968.
There are various Universities worldwide which now offer Yiddish programs based on the YIVO Yiddish standard.
Yiddish changed significantly during the 20th century.
Western Yiddish is reported by ''Ethnologue'' to have had an ethnic population of 50,000 in 2000, and an undated speaking population of 5,000, mostly in Germany.
The last Yiddish-language schools, theaters and publications were closed by the end of the 1940s.
Its rich literature was more widely published than ever, Yiddish theatre and Yiddish film were booming, and it for a time achieved status as one of the official languages of the Ukrainian People's Republic, the Belarusian and the short-lived Galician SSR, and the Jewish Autonomous Oblast.
Prior to the Holocaust, there were over 10 million speakers of Yiddish; 85% of the Jews who died in the Holocaust were Yiddish speakers, leading to a massive decline in the use of the language.
Despite this growing popularity among many American Jews, finding opportunities for practical use of Yiddish is becoming increasingly difficult, and thus many students have trouble learning to speak the language.
''gut tak im betage se vaer dis makhazor in beis hakneses trage''
The language which had lost many of its native speakers during WWII has been making somewhat of a comeback.
Eastern Yiddish is far more common today.
These words and terms were used because of their familiarity, but more so because in most cases there were no equivalent terms in the vernacular which could express the Jewish concepts or describe the objects of cultural significance.
There is a growing revival of interest in Yiddish culture among secular Israelis, with the flourishing of new proactive cultural organizations like YUNG YiDiSH, as well as Yiddish theater (usually with simultaneous translation to Hebrew and Russian) and young people are taking university courses in Yiddish, some achieving considerable fluency.
The Swedish government publishes documents in Yiddish, of which the most recent details the national action plan for human rights.
The population is largely elderly: 72,885 of the speakers were older than 65, 66,815 were between 18 and 64, and only 39,245 were age 17 or lower.
Reports of the number of current Yiddish speakers vary significantly.
Latin and Italian "orare".
This has resulted in some difficulty in communication between Yiddish speakers from Israel and those from other countries.
A 1996 report by the Council of Europe estimates a worldwide Yiddish-speaking population of about two million.
Over the course of the 14th and 15th centuries, songs and poems in Yiddish, and macaronic pieces in Hebrew and German, began to appear.
Among most Ashkenazi Haredim, Hebrew is generally reserved for prayer, while Yiddish is used for religious studies, as well as a home and business language.
''Der Kanader Adler'' ("The Canadian Eagle", founded by Hirsch Wolofsky), Montreal’s daily Yiddish newspaper, appeared from 1907 to 1988.
Computer scientist Raphael Finkel maintains a hub of Yiddish-language resources, including a searchable dictionary and spell checker.
There may have been parallel developments in the two regions, seeding the Western and Eastern dialects of Modern Yiddish.
In 1978, Isaac Bashevis Singer, a writer in the Yiddish language, who was born in Poland and lived in the United States, received the Nobel Prize in literature.
The Worms machzor is discussed in Frakes, 2004, and Baumgarten, ed.
Another Yiddish retelling of a chivalric romance, װידװילט ''Vidvilt'' (often referred to as "Widuwilt" by Germanizing scholars), presumably also dates from the 15th century, although the manuscripts are from the 16th.
Educational autonomy for Jews in several countries (notably Poland) after World War I led to an increase in formal Yiddish-language education, more uniform orthography, and to the 1925 founding of the Yiddish Scientific Institute, YIVO.
This process is called  (''taytshn'') - "translating" .
Western Yiddish is divided into Southwestern (Swiss–Alsatian–Southern German), Midwestern (Central German), and Northwestern (Netherlandic–Northern German) dialects.
"The New Friend", St. Petersburg).
The Yiddish readership in the UK is mainly reliant upon imported material from the United States and Israel for newspapers, magazines and other periodicals.
However, the number of speakers is increasing in global Hasidic communities.
In June 1999, the Swedish Parliament enacted legislation giving Yiddish legal status as one of the country's official minority languages (entering into effect in April 2000).
Michael Wex writes, "As increasing numbers of Yiddish speakers moved from the Slavic-speaking East to Western Europe and the Americas in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, they were so quick to jettison Slavic vocabulary that the most prominent Yiddish writers of the time—the founders of modern Yiddish literature, who were still living in Slavic-speaking countries—revised the printed editions of their oeuvres to eliminate obsolete and 'unnecessary' Slavisms."
Western Yiddish includes additional words of Latin derivation (but still very few): for example, אָרן ''orn'' (to pray), cf.
He was fluent in Yiddish, and translated several Yiddish poems and stories into English, including Isaac Bashevis Singer's "Gimpel the Fool".
The typical circulation in the 21st century is a few thousand.
The Torah Talks of the late Lubavitch leaders are published in their original form, Yiddish.
In Israel, however, Haredim commonly speak Hebrew, with the notable exception of many Hasidic communities.
There is a scalable image online at the indicated reference.
In Roman times, many of the Jews living in Rome and Southern Italy appear to have been Greek-speakers, and this is reflected in some Ashkenazi personal names (e.g., ''Kalonymus'').
Although millions of Yiddish speakers survived the war (including nearly all Yiddish speakers in the Americas), further assimilation in countries such as the United States and the Soviet Union, along with the strictly monolingual stance of the Zionist movement, led to a decline in the use of Eastern Yiddish.
Yiddish is written with a fully vocalized alphabet based on the Hebrew script.
The segmentation of the Yiddish readership, between women who read מאַמע־לשון ''mame-loshn'' but not לשון־קדש ''loshn-koydesh'', and men who read both, was significant enough that distinctive typefaces were used for each.
Zuckermann believes that "Israeli does include numerous Hebrew elements resulting from a conscious revival but also numerous pervasive linguistic features deriving from a subconscious survival of the revivalists’ mother tongues, e.g.
In 1991, Paul Wexler proposed a highly heterodox model that took Yiddish, by which he means primarily eastern Yiddish, not to be genetically grounded in a Germanic language, but rather as "Judeo-Sorbian" (a proposed Western Slavic language) whose vocabulary had been largely replaced by High German in the 9th to 12th centuries, when, according to his theory, large numbers of German-speakers settled in Sorbian and Polabian lands, and some of them, after converting, developed a Judeo-Slavic tongue which was subsequently relexified with Old High German.
The advent of the printing press in the 16th century enabled the large scale production of works, at a cheaper cost, some of which has survived.
A public educational system entirely based on the Yiddish language was established and comprised kindergartens, schools, and higher educational institutions (technical schools, rabfaks and other university departments).
Yiddish is also spoken in many Haredi communities throughout Israel.
An earlier one provides general information about national minority language policies.
Wexler's model has met with little academic support, and strong critical challenges, especially among historical linguists.
It is also known as ''Kinig Artus Hof'', an adaptation of the Middle High German romance ''Wigalois'' by Wirnt von Gravenberg.
There has been a resurgence in Yiddish learning in recent times among many from around the world with Jewish ancestry.
The name commonly given to the semicursive form used exclusively for Yiddish was  (''vaybertaytsh'' = "women's ''taytsh''," shown in the heading and fourth column in the adjacent illustration), with square Hebrew letters (shown in the third column) being reserved for text in that language and Aramaic.
The term "Yiddish", short for "Yiddish-Teitsch" (Jewish German), did not become the most frequently used designation in the literature until the 18th century.
When announcing this action, the government made an additional statement about "simultaneously commencing completely new initiatives for... Yiddish and the other minority languages".
Much work needs to be done, though, to fully analyze the contributions of those languages to Yiddish.
These were collected in the late 15th century by Menahem ben Naphtali Oldendorf.
The first Jews were permitted to reside in Sweden during the late 18th century.
In the case of Yiddish, this scenario sees it as emerging when speakers of Judeo-French and Judeo-Romance languages began to acquire varieties of Middle High German, and from these groups the Ashkenazi community took shape.
Traditionally religious Jews, on the other hand, preferred use of Yiddish, viewing Hebrew as a respected holy language reserved for prayer and religious study.
Vilnius Yiddish Institute is an integral part of the four-century-old Vilnius University.
"The Friend"), was resumed in 2004 with  (''der nayer fraynd''; lit.
A body of literature therefore developed for which women were a primary audience.
It continued to be spoken widely for decades, nonetheless, in areas with compact Jewish populations (primarily in Moldova, Ukraine, and to a lesser extent Belarus).
A widely cited summary of attitudes in the 1930s was published by Max Weinreich, quoting a remark by an auditor of one of his lectures:  (''a shprakh iz a dialekt mit an armey un flot'' — "A language is a dialect with an army and navy").
Many "Yiddishisms," like "Italianisms" and "Spanishisms," entered the spoken New York dialect, often used by Jews and non-Jews alike, unaware of the linguistic origin of the phrases.
In religious circles, it is the Ashkenazi Haredi Jews, particularly the Hasidic Jews and the Lithuanian yeshiva world (see Lithuanian Jews), who continue to teach, speak and use Yiddish, making it a language used regularly by hundreds of thousands of Haredi Jews today.
Jewish cultural life was revived in Birobidzhan much earlier than elsewhere in the Soviet Union.
Another point of difference was the use of Hebrew and Aramaic words.
The Jewish Autonomous Oblast was formed in 1934 in the Russian Far East, with its capital city in Birobidzhan and Yiddish as its official language.
It is not known when the Yiddish writing system first developed.
Another significant writer is Avroham ben Schemuel Pikartei, who published a paraphrase on the Book of Job in 1557.
During the same period, a tradition seems to have emerged of the Jewish community's adapting its own versions of German secular literature.
This brief rhyme is decoratively embedded in an otherwise purely Hebrew text.
They retained the Semitic vocabulary needed for religious purposes and created a Judeo-German form of speech, sometimes not accepted as a fully autonomous language.
This usage is distinctive enough that it has been dubbed "Yeshivish".
In 1976, the Canadian-born American author Saul Bellow received the Nobel Prize in literature.
Thus, Hebrew emerged as the dominant linguistic common denominator between the different population groups.
This helped to bond Jews from many countries.
''Ethnologue'' estimates, based on publications through 1991, that there were at that time 1.5 million speakers of Eastern Yiddish, of which 40% lived in Ukraine, 15% in Israel, and 10% in the United States.
Alternative theories recognize the massive extent of Yiddish's Germanic vocabulary.
Most of the Jewish immigrants to the New York metropolitan area during the years of Ellis Island considered Yiddish their native language; however, native Yiddish speakers tended not to pass the language on to their children, who assimilated and spoke English.
On 6 September 2007, it became possible to register Internet domains with Yiddish names in the national top-level domain .SE.
One such school located within Vilnius University (Vilnius Yiddish Institute) was the first Yiddish center of higher learning to be established in post-Holocaust Eastern Europe.
Its geographic extent did not coincide with the German principalities of the time, and it included northern France.
Colloquially, the language is sometimes called  (''mame-loshn'', literally "mother tongue"), distinguishing it from  (''loshn-koydesh'', "holy tongue"), meaning Hebrew.
Published Yiddish scholar and researcher Dovid Katz is among the Faculty.
The museum has taken steps to revive the culture through concerts and events held on site.
This included secular works, such as the בָּבָֿא-בּוך ''Bovo-Bukh'', and religious writing specifically for women, such as the צאנה וראינה ''Tseno Ureno'' and the תחנות ''Tkhines''.
However, many Haredim who use Modern Hebrew also understand Yiddish.
Both Weinreich and Solomon Birnbaum developed this model further in the mid-1950s.
Although not reflected in the spoken language, a main point of difference was the use of the Hebrew alphabet for the recording of the Germanic vernacular, which may have been adopted either because of the community's familiarity with the alphabet or to prevent the non-Jewish population from understanding the correspondence.
Yiddish theaters began opening in the 1970s.
This 14th-century manuscript was discovered in the geniza of a Cairo synagogue in 1896, and also contains a collection of narrative poems on themes from the Hebrew Bible and the Haggadah.
The first language of Ashkenazi Jews may, as noted above, have been Aramaic, the vernacular of the Jews in Roman-era Judea and ancient and early medieval Mesopotamia.
'''Yiddish''' (,  or , ''yidish''/''idish'', literally "Jewish"; in older sources ייִדיש-טײַטש "Yiddish-Taitsh" (English: ''Judaeo-German'')) is the historical language of the Ashkenazi Jews.
The theatre group also tours Canada, US, Israel, and Europe.
The linguistic style and vocabulary of Yiddish have influenced the manner in which many Orthodox Jews who attend yeshivas speak English.
The First Birobidzhan International Summer Program for Yiddish Language and Culture was launched in 2007.
However, the London-based weekly ''Jewish Tribune'', has a small section in Yiddish called  ''Idishe Tribune''.
It was one of the official languages of the Byelorussian SSR, as well as several agricultural districts of the Galician SSR.
", used to tear down signs written in "foreign" languages and disturb Yiddish theatre gatherings.
It was later chosen to be on the Library of Congress National Film Registry for being considered a "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" film.
In the early 20th century, especially after the Socialist October Revolution in Russia, Yiddish was emerging as a major Eastern European language.
For example, the tales about the Baal Shem Tov were written largely in Yiddish.
The Jewish population in Sweden is estimated at around 20,000.
Members of anti-Zionist Haredi groups such as the Satmar Hasidim, who view the commonplace use of Hebrew as a form of Zionism, use Yiddish almost exclusively.
Exactly what German base lies behind the earliest form of Yiddish is disputed.
The widest-circulation Yiddish newspapers are probably the weekly issues  (דער איד = The Jew) and  (דער בלאַט; ''blat'' = paper) and  (די צייטונג; = the newspaper).
In some of the more closely knit such communities, Yiddish is spoken as a home and schooling language, especially in Hasidic, Litvish, or Yeshivish communities, such as Brooklyn's Borough Park, Williamsburg, and Crown Heights, and in the communities of Monsey, Kiryas Joel, and New Square in New York (over 88% of the population of Kiryas Joel is reported to speak Yiddish at home.)
Assimilation following World War II further decreased the use of Yiddish both among survivors and Yiddish-speakers from other countries (such as in the Americas).
Interest in klezmer music provided another bonding mechanism.
One of the best-known early woman authors was Glückel of Hameln, whose memoirs are still in print.
The lines of development proposed by the different theories do not necessarily rule out the others (at least not entirely); an article in ''The Jewish Daily Forward'' argues that "in the end, a new 'standard theory' of Yiddish’s origins will probably be based on the work of Weinreich and his challengers alike."
The Holocaust, however, led to a dramatic, sudden decline in the use of Yiddish, as the extensive Jewish communities, both secular and religious, that used Yiddish in their day-to-day life were largely destroyed.
After the founding of the State of Israel, a massive wave of Jewish immigrants from Arab countries arrived.
The two main candidates for the germinal matrix of Yiddish, the Rhineland and Bavaria, are not necessarily incompatible.
According to Mikhail Shvydkoy, former Minister of Culture of Russia and himself of Jewish origin, Yiddish culture in Russia is gone, and its revival is unlikely.
One solution has been the establishment of a farm in Goshen, New York for Yiddishists.
In the Soviet Union during the 1920s, Yiddish was promoted as the language of the Jewish proletariat.
Several countries which ratified the 1992 European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages have included Yiddish in the list of their recognized minority languages: the Netherlands (1996), Sweden (2000), Romania (2008), Poland (2009), Bosnia and Herzegovina (2010).
An additional distinctive semicursive typeface was, and still is, used for rabbinical commentary on religious texts when Hebrew and Yiddish appear on the same page.
Notable Yiddish writers of the late 19th and early 20th centuries are Sholem Yankev Abramovitch, writing as Mendele Mocher Sforim; Sholem Rabinovitsh, widely known as Sholem Aleichem, whose stories about  (''tevye der milkhiker'' = Tevye the Dairyman) inspired the Broadway musical and film ''Fiddler on the Roof''; and Isaac Leib Peretz.
Women in the Ashkenazi community were traditionally not literate in Hebrew, but did read and write Yiddish.
On the 2010 census, 1,683 people speak Yiddish in Russia, approximately 1% of all the Jews of the Russian Federation.
The established view is that, as with other Jewish languages, Jews speaking distinct languages learned new co-territorial vernaculars, which they then Judaized.
(''forverts'' – The Jewish Daily Forward) was one of seven Yiddish daily newspapers in New York City, and other Yiddish newspapers served as a forum for Jews of all European backgrounds.
In time, Jewish communities would have been speaking their own versions of these German dialects, mixed with linguistic elements that they themselves brought into the region.
Even though Yiddish has receded, it is the immediate ancestral language of Montrealers like Mordecai Richler, Leonard Cohen as well as former interim city mayor Michael Applebaum.
The widespread use of Aramaic among the large non-Jewish Syrian trading population of the Roman provinces, including those in Europe, would have reinforced the use of Aramaic among Jews engaged in trade.
Publication of an earlier Yiddish periodical ( - der fraynd; lit.
By contrast, Asimov's younger siblings, born in the United States, never developed any degree of fluency in Yiddish.
It is generally accepted that early Yiddish was likely to have contained elements from other languages of the Near East and Europe, absorbed through migrations.
In Vilna, there was debate over which language should take primacy, Hebrew or Yiddish.
This conflict also reflected the opposing views among secular Jews worldwide, one side seeing Hebrew (and Zionism) and the other Yiddish (and Internationalism) as the means of defining Jewish nationalism.
The earliest surviving references date from the 12th century and call the language  (''loshn-ashknaz'' = "language of Ashkenaz") or  (''taytsh''), a variant of ''tiutsch'', the contemporary name for Middle High German.
Further demographic information about the recent status of what is treated as an Eastern–Western dialect continuum is provided in the YIVO ''Language and Cultural Atlas of Ashkenazic Jewry'' (Language and Cultural Atlas of Ashkenazic Jewry).
Ashkenazi culture later spread into Eastern Europe with large-scale population migrations.
This is commonly termed Rashi script, from the name of the most renowned early author, whose commentary is usually printed using this script.
Although used in various countries, Yiddish has attained official recognition as a minority language only in Moldova, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Netherlands and Sweden.
Yiddish was an official language of the Ukrainian People's Republic (1917–21).
At the same time, Hebrew was considered a bourgeois language and its use was generally discouraged.
There are some who send their children to schools in which the primary language of instruction is Yiddish.
There has been frequent debate about the extent of the linguistic independence of Yiddish from the languages that it absorbed.
In the former Soviet states, presently active Yiddish authors include Yoysef Burg (Chernivtsi 1912–2009) and Aleksander Beyderman (b.
In 1915, the circulation of the daily Yiddish newspapers was half a million in New York City alone, and 600,000 nationally.
It originated during the 9th century in Central Europe, providing the nascent Ashkenazi community with an extensive Germanic based vernacular fused with elements taken from Hebrew and Aramaic, as well as from Slavic languages and traces of Romance languages.
In Weinreich's model, speakers of Old French or Old Italian, literate in Hebrew or Aramaic, migrated through Southern Europe to settle in the Rhine Valley in an area known as Lotharingia (later known in Yiddish as ''Loter'') extending over parts of Germany and France; There, they encountered and were influenced by Jewish speakers of High German and several other German dialects.
Yiddish words used in English were documented extensively by Leo Rosten in ''The Joys of Yiddish''; see also the list of English words of Yiddish origin.
Legal scholars Eugene Volokh and Alex Kozinski argue that Yiddish is "supplanting Latin as the spice in American legal argot."
Most Ashkenazi yeshivas' highest level lectures in Talmud and Halakha are delivered in Yiddish by the rosh yeshivas as well as ethical talks of mussar.
In addition, thousands more subscribed to the numerous weekly papers and the many magazines.
The ''Yiddish Forward'' still appears weekly and is also available in an online edition.
Even when recognized as an autonomous language, it has sometimes been referred to as Judeo-German, along the lines of other Jewish languages like Judeo-Persian or Judeo-French.
In the late 19th and into the 20th century the language was more commonly called "Jewish", especially in non-Jewish contexts, but "Yiddish" is again the more common designation.
In the 2000 census, 178,945 people in the United States reported speaking Yiddish at home.
It is believed that virtually all native speakers of Yiddish in Sweden today are adults, and most of them elderly.
Frakes, 2005 – see the ''Bibliography'' at the foot of this article.
In Poland, which traditionally had Yiddish speaking communities, a particular museum has begun to revive Yiddish education and culture.
(Rashi is also the typeface normally used when the Sephardic counterpart to Yiddish, Ladino, is printed in Hebrew script.)
There has been periodic assertion that Yiddish is a dialect of German, or even "just broken German, more of a linguistic mishmash than a true language".
Montreal had and to some extent still has one of the most thriving Yiddish communities in North America.
The major exception to the decline of spoken Yiddish can be found in Haredi communities all over the world.
The newspaper  (''Der Birobidzhaner Shtern''; lit: "The Birobidzhan Star") includes a Yiddish section.
The Monument National was the center of Yiddish theater from 1896 until the construction of the Saidye Bronfman Centre for the Arts, inaugurated on September 24, 1967, where the established resident theater, the Dora Wasserman Yiddish Theatre, remains the only permanent Yiddish theatre in North America.
Nothing is known with certainty about the vernacular of the earliest Jews in Germany, but several theories have been put forward.
Hebrew, on the other hand, was regarded as a holy language reserved for ritual and spiritual purposes and not for common use.
, according to data provided by the Russian Census Bureau, there were 97 speakers of Yiddish in the JAO.
In eastern Europe, the response to these forces took the opposite direction, with Yiddish becoming the cohesive force in a secular culture (see Yiddish Renaissance).
