The story took a revisionist look at Ono's music for a new generation of fans more accepting of her role as a pioneer in the merger of pop and the avant-garde.
The next year, "Move on Fast" became her sixth consecutive number-one hit on the ''Billboard'' Hot Dance Club Songs chart and her eighth number-one hit overall.
The kanji translation of Yoko's first name ''Yoko'' means "ocean child".
By the end of the year she had become one of three artists with two songs in the Top 20 Dance/Club and had two consecutive No.
Lennon subsequently expressed regret that he had not given co-writing credit to Ono instead, who actually helped him write the song.
In the early years of the marriage, Ono left most of Kyoko's parenting to Cox while she pursued her art full-time.
McCartney subsequently passed her response to Lennon while visiting him in Los Angeles.
John Cage and Marcel Duchamp were significant influences on Ono's art.
Lennon detailed this period in the Beatles' song "The Ballad of John and Yoko".
Each year, between October 9 and December 8, it projects a vertical beam of light high into the sky.
She was made an honorary citizen of Reykjavík, Iceland, on October 9, 2013.
She was also the winner of the 2012 Oskar Kokoschka Prize, Austria's highest award for applied contemporary art.
During her visit, Ono gave a lecture and performance entitled "The Road of Hope" at Tokyo's Mori Art Museum, during which she painted a large calligraphy piece entitled "Dream" to help raise funds for construction of the Rainbow House, an institution for the orphans of the Great East Japan Earthquake.
(The hotel has been doing steady business with the room they stayed in for over 40 years.)
It was a really strange situation."
On the cover, a warm, smiling Ono holds the Earth in the palm of her hand.
Guest remixers of ''Rising'' material included Cibo Matto, Ween, Tricky, and Thurston Moore.
In 1956, Ono left college to elope with Japanese composer Toshi Ichiyanagi, a star in Tokyo's experimental community.
On October 9, 2007, she dedicated a new memorial called the Imagine Peace Tower, located on the island of Viðey, 1&nbsp;km outside the Skarfabakki harbour in Reykjavík, Iceland.
Other group members include Lady Gaga and Alec Baldwin.
The rest of the family followed soon after, with Yoko meeting Eisuke when she was two.
After Ono set a painting on fire at one performance, her mentor John Cage advised her to treat the paper with flame retardant.
Two weeks before Yoko's birth, Eisuke was transferred to San Francisco by his employer, the Yokohama Specie Bank.
In February 2013, to coincide with her 80th birthday, the largest retrospective of her work, ''Half-a-Wind Show,'' opened at the Schirn Kunsthalle Frankfurt
Also on ''The White Album,'' Ono contributed backing vocals on "Birthday", and one line of lead vocals on "The Continuing Story of Bungalow Bill."
He's still my son, whether he came from a bottle of whiskey or because they didn't have pills in those days."
Ono reprised the piece in Paris in 2003, in the low post-9/11 period between the US and France, saying she hoped to show that this is "a time where we need to trust each other."
In August 2011, she made the documentary film about the Bed-Ins ''Bed Peace'' available for free on YouTube, and as part of her website "Imagine Peace".
When Lennon's wife Cynthia asked for an explanation for Ono's telephoning their home, he told her that Ono was only trying to obtain money for her "avant-garde bullshit."
She had responded, "You're a good songwriter.
Ono released her first solo album, ''Yoko Ono/Plastic Ono Band'', in 1970 as a companion piece to Lennon's better-known ''John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band''.
Its program has since expanded to include writers, such as  Michael Pollan and Alice Walker, activists such as Vandana Shiva and Pussy Riot, organizations such as New York's Center for Constitutional Rights, even an entire country (Iceland).
While visiting with Ono in March 1974, McCartney, on leaving, asked "What will make you come back to John?"
(During her stay in Lennon's city of birth, she said she was "astounded" by the city's renaissance.)
He told her his separation from Ono was now over, though Ono would allow him to continue seeing her as his mistress.
The next month, she tweeted an anti-gun message with the ''Season of Glass'' image of Lennon's bloodied glasses on what would have been her and Lennon's 44th anniversary, noting that more than 1 million people have been killed by guns since Lennon's death in 1980.
Ono and her family were forced to beg for food while pulling their belongings in a wheelbarrow.
Ono studied piano from the age of 4 to 12 or 13.
Ono and Lennon's son, Sean, was born on October 9, 1975, Lennon's 35th birthday.
4'', often referred to as ''Bottoms.''
The English press were particularly negative, and prompted the couple's move to the US.
This first incarnation of the group also consisted of guitarist Eric Clapton, bass player Klaus Voormann, and drummer Alan White.
In 1982, she released ''It's Alright (I See Rainbows)''.
For example, Elvis Costello recorded a version of Ono's song "Walking on Thin Ice", the B-52's (who drew from her early recordings) covered "Don't Worry, Kyoko (Mummy's Only Looking for Her Hand in the Snow)" (shortening the title to "Don't Worry"), and Sonic Youth included a performance of Ono's early conceptual "Voice Piece for Soprano" on their experimental album ''SYR4: Goodbye 20th Century''.
In addition to Mekas, Maciunas, Young, and Warhol, she has also collaborated with DeAsis, Yvonne Rainer, and Zbigniew Rybczyński.
Later the same year, she inaugurated a peace award, the LennonOno Grant for Peace, by giving $50,000 (£31,900) in prize money originally to artists living "in regions of conflict".
Guests including Bette Midler, Paul Simon and his son Harper, and principal members of Sonic Youth and the Scissor Sisters interpreted her songs in their own styles.
In the 1970s, Ono and Lennon became close to many radical, counterculture leaders, including Bobby Seale, Abbie Hoffman, Jerry Rubin, Michael X, John Sinclair (for whose rally in Michigan they flew to sing Lennon's song "Free John Sinclair" that effectively released the poet from prison), Angela Davis, and street musician David Peel.
With that work, Ono suggested that a work of art no longer needed to be mounted on a wall and inaccessible.
She brought feminism to the forefront in her music, influencing artists as diverse as the B-52s and Meredith Monk.
Ono went on  a musical hiatus until signing with Rykodisc in 1992 to release the comprehensive six-disc box set ''Onobox''.
During the Liverpool Biennial in 2004, Ono flooded the city with two images on banners, bags, stickers, postcards, flyers, posters and badges: one of a woman's naked breast, the other of the same model's vulva.
Her experimental art was also not popularly accepted.
The same year, the couple contributed an experimental piece to ''The White Album'' called "Revolution 9".
According to Ono, the work was meant to be innocent, not shocking; she was attempting to replicate the experience of a baby looking up at its mother's body, those parts of the mother's body being a child's introduction to humanity.
In 1940, the family moved to New York City.
On the 1998 John Lennon anthology, ''Lennon Legend'', the composer credit of "Give Peace a Chance" was changed to "John Lennon" from its original composing credit of "Lennon–McCartney."
In 1986, Ono set out on a goodwill world tour for ''Starpeace'', primarily visiting Eastern European countries.
In 2000, she founded the John Lennon Museum in Saitama, Saitama, Japan.
Ono later went to the Karuizawa mountain resort with members of her family.
That year she became a grandmother, when Emi was born to Kyoko.
Although the exhibition had not yet opened, Lennon wanted to hammer a nail into the clean board, but Ono stopped him.
It took the form of an open letter, inviting people to think of, and wish for, peace.
In May 2009, she designed a T-shirt for the second Fashion Against AIDS campaign and collection of HIV/AIDS awareness, NGO Designers Against AIDS, and H&M, with the statement "Imagine Peace" depicted in 21 languages.
Lennon did, giving Ono the original handwritten lyrics to "The Word."
For example, an ''Esquire'' article of the period was titled "John Rennon's Excrusive Gloupie" and featured an unflattering David Levine cartoon.
The exhibition's curator Alexandra Munroe wrote that "John Lennon got it, on his first meeting with Yoko: when he climbed the ladder to peer at the framed paper on the ceiling, he encountered the tiny word YES.
In March of the same year, she was awarded the 20,000-euro ($26,400) Oskar Kokoschka Prize in Austria.
As the widow of the victim, her opinion has a strong influence on the parole board.
4 in the UK, where its release was delayed until 1972, and has periodically reemerged on the UK Singles Chart.
Kyoko is also referenced in the first line of "Happy Christmas (War Is Over)" when Yoko whispers "Happy Christmas, Kyoko", followed by Lennon whispering, "Happy Christmas, Julian."
In 2013, the Canadian singer, Peaches reprised it at the multi-day Meltdown festival at the Southbank Centre in London, which Ono curated.
She has stated that the couple was thinking about going out to dinner after spending several hours in a recording studio, but were returning to their apartment instead, because Lennon wanted to see Sean before he was put to bed.
"Walking on Thin Ice (For John)" was released as a single less than a month later, and became Ono's first chart success, peaking at No.
In February 2013, Ono accepted the Rainer Hildebrandt Medal at Berlin's Checkpoint Charlie Museum, awarded to her and Lennon for their lifetime of work for peace and human rights.
I think that's wrong..... she's just the opposite.....
In 1961, years before meeting Lennon, Ono had her first major public performance in a concert at the 258-seat Carnegie Recital Hall (smaller than the "Main Hall").
After Cage finished teaching at the New School in the summer of 1960, Ono was determined to rent a place to present her works along with the work of other avant-garde artists in the city.
In the liner notes to ''Season of Glass'', Ono explained that the album was not dedicated to Lennon because "he would have been offended—he was one of us."
She also donated to disaster relief efforts after typhoon Ondoy in 2009, and she assists Filipino schoolchildren.
Eisuke came from a long line of samurai warrior-scholars.
Performers included Ornette Coleman, other renowned free jazz performers, and Ringo Starr.
The two began corresponding and, in September 1967, Lennon sponsored Ono's solo show at Lisson Gallery in London.
She has a daughter, Kyoko Chan Cox, from her marriage to Anthony Cox and a son, Sean Taro Ono Lennon, from her marriage to Lennon, with whom she collaborates musically.
She learned of Cage at Sarah Lawrence and met him through his student Ichiyanagi Toshi in Cage's legendary experimental composition class at the New School for Social Research: She was thus introduced to more of Cage's unconventional neo-Dadaism first hand and his New York City protégés Allan Kaprow, Brecht, Mac Low, Al Hansen and the poet Dick Higgins.
Later that year, Ono and Lennon's final album, ''Milk and Honey'', was released as an unfinished demo.
She received a Golden Lion Award for lifetime achievement from the Venice Biennale in 2009 and the 2012 Oskar Kokoschka Prize, Austria's highest award for applied contemporary art.
1 hits on Billboard's Hot Dance Club Play Charts.
She first met Lennon in 1966 at her own art exhibition in London, and they became a couple in 1968.
They performed at Tokyo's Sogetsu Hall, with Ono lying atop a piano played by John Cage.
After the meeting, he failed to return home or call Pang.
Ono appeared onstage at Microsoft's June 1, 2009, E3 Expo press conference with Olivia Harrison, Paul McCartney, and Ringo Starr to promote the ''Beatles: Rock Band'' video game, which was universally praised by critics.
Ono's ex-husband subsequently raised Kyoko under the name Ruth Holman in an organization known as the Church of the Living Word (or "the Walk").
The first half of their performance consisted of rock standards.
From June 19 to September 9, her work ''To the Light'' was exhibited at the Serpentine Gallery in London.
Of this time Ono has said that her heroes were the twelve-tone composers Arnold Schoenberg and Alban Berg.
Ono spoke at length about the evils of racism and sexism.
Other performers of the piece have included Charlotte Moorman and John Hendricks.
She also promoted the exhibition on her website, and Julian and Sean are close.
The single "Hell in Paradise" was a hit, reaching No.
She showed this work and other instructional work again at Macunias's AG Gallery in July 1961.
Other performance/demonstrations with John included "bagism," iterations with John of the ''Bag Piece''s she introduced in the early 1960s, which encouraged a disregard for physical appearance in judging others.
On September 16, she and Sean attended the opening of Julian Lennon's photo exhibition at the Morrison Hotel in New York City, appearing for the first time photos with Cynthia and Julian.
In February 16, 2007 a deal was reached where extortion charges were dropped, and he pleaded guilty to attempted grand larceny in the third degree, a felony, and sentenced to the 60 days he had already spent in jail.
She also promoted his work on her website.
I think she's just more determined than most people to be herself."
In March 2002, she was present with Cherie Blair at the unveiling of a 7-foot statue of Lennon, to mark the renaming of Liverpool airport to Liverpool John Lennon Airport.
She also received minor airplay with the ballad "Mrs. Lennon".
Isoko's maternal grandfather Zenjiro Yasuda (安田 善次郎 ''Yasuda Zenjirō'') was an affiliate of the Yasuda clan and zaibatsu.
I wrote some twelve-tone songs, then my music went into an area that my teacher felt was really a bit off track, and..... he said, 'Well, look, there are people who are doing things like what you do and they're called avant-garde.'"
Starting the next year, some DJs remixed other Ono songs for dance clubs.
Her name still connotes the figure of the evil female interloper to the mainstream.
George Harrison verbally assaulted her after she took one of his chocolate digestive biscuits without asking.
In a ''Rolling Stone'' interview in 1987, Ono pointed out McCartney's place in the process of the disintegration of the band.
Following the murder, Ono went into complete seclusion for an extended period.
During Lennon's last two years with the Beatles, he and Ono began attending as well as creating their own public protests against the Vietnam War.
YES refers to the title of a 1966 sculptural work by Yoko Ono, shown at Indica Gallery, London: viewers climb a ladder to read the word "yes", printed on a small canvas suspended from the ceiling.
The couple settled at Tittenhurst Park at Sunninghill, Berkshire, in southeast England.
In 2014, "Angel" was Ono's twelfth number one on the US Dance chart.
At 14 Yoko took up vocal training in lieder-singing.
She funded Strawberry Fields in New York City, the Imagine Peace Tower in Iceland, and the John Lennon Museum in Saitama, Japan (which closed in 2010).
3 in the UK and No.
In 2009, Ono created an exhibit called "John Lennon: The New York City Years" for the NYC Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Annex.
The exhibit used music, photographs, and personal items to depict Lennon's life in New York, and a portion of the cost of each ticket was donated to Spirit Foundation, a charitable foundation set up by Lennon and Ono.
I call the pieces petrified bronze.
Ono was a pioneer of conceptual art and performance art.
Her spokesperson Elliott Mintz called it "an attempt to rewrite history.
Maciunas invited her formally join the Fluxus group, but she declined because she wanted to remain independent.
The all-new Plastic Ono Band lineup included Sean Lennon, Cornelius, and Yuka Honda.
During this (her second) trip to Ireland (the first was with John before they married), she visited the crypt of Irish leader Daniel O'Connell at Glasnevin Cemetery and Dún Laoghaire, from where Irish departed for England to escape the famine.
After Lennon's death, however, McCartney again attempted to change the order to McCartney–Lennon for songs that were solely or predominantly written by him, such as "Yesterday," but Ono would not allow it, saying she felt this broke an agreement that the two had made while Lennon was still alive, and the surviving Beatle argued that such an agreement never existed.
This remark infuriated McCartney's wife Linda, who was dying from breast cancer at the time, and when Linda died less than a year later, McCartney did not invite Ono to his wife's memorial service in Manhattan.
On October 2, Ono and the Plastic Ono Band performed at the Orpheum Theatre in Los Angeles, with special guest Lady Gaga, whom she deeply admires.
In an October 2010 interview, Ono spoke about Lennon's "lost weekend" and her subsequent reconciliation with him.
She credited McCartney with helping save her marriage to John.
In a second version of Ono's and Lennon's first meeting, told by Paul McCartney, Ono was in London in 1965 compiling original musical scores for a book on which John Cage was working entitled ''Notations''.
She spent some time at Sarah Lawrence College, and then became involved in New York City's downtown artists scene, including the Fluxus group.
On April 1 of that year, she was named the first "Global Autism Ambassador" by the Autism Speaks organization.
Over 1,000 stations in over 50 countries participated in the simultaneous broadcast.
Ono installed a billboard on U.S. Route 41 in Fort Myers to promote the show and peace.
In 1990, Ono collaborated with music consultant Jeff Pollack to honor what would have been Lennon's 50th birthday with a worldwide broadcast of "Imagine".
In July, OR Books published Ono's sequel to 1964's ''Grapefruit'', another book of instruction-based 'action poems' this time entitled, ''Acorn.''
Two years later, however, Ono publicly compared Lennon to Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, while McCartney, she said, more closely resembled his less-talented rival Antonio Salieri.
Accepting an award at the 2005 Q Awards, Ono mentioned that Lennon had once felt insecure about his songwriting.
The effort raised a total of $33,000.
Every time Chapman has a parole hearing — which occurs every two years — Ono has come out strongly against his release from prison.
After finalizing the divorce, Cox and Ono married again on June 6, 1963.
On December 8, 1980, Lennon and Ono were in the studio working on Ono's song "Walking on Thin Ice".
Ono has been an activist for peace and human rights since the 1960s.
It was during this period in her life, Ono says, that she developed her "aggressive" attitude and understanding of "outsider" status when children taunted her and Keisuke, who were once well-to-do.
While her parents approved of her college choice, Ono said they disapproved of her lifestyle and chastised her for befriending people they felt were beneath her.
During the second half, Ono took to the microphone and performed an avant-garde set along with the band, finishing with music that consisted mainly of feedback, while she screamed and sang.
In 1969, the Plastic Ono Band's first album, ''Live Peace in Toronto 1969'', was recorded during the Toronto Rock and Roll Revival festival.
The following year, she collaborated with various alternative rock musicians for an EP entitled ''Rising Mixes''.
1 on Billboard's Dance/Club Play chart, gaining Ono her first No.
She sang "Mulberry," a song about her time in the countryside after the Japanese collapse in World War II for only the third time ever, with Thurston Moore: She had previously performed the song with John and with Sean.
Ono supposedly had not heard of the Beatles, but relented on the condition that Lennon pay her five shillings, to which Lennon replied, "I'll give you an imaginary five shillings and hammer an imaginary nail in."
The next month, Lennon agreed to meet Ono, who claimed to have found a cure for smoking.
Hide until everybody forgets about you.
In 1999, after the Columbine High School massacre, Ono paid for billboards to be put up in New York City and Los Angeles that bore the image of Lennon's blood-splashed spectacles.
Ono returned home to live with her parents and, suffering from clinical depression, was briefly placed in a mental institution.
The next year, Eisuke was transferred from New York City to Hanoi, and the family returned to Japan.
We're supporting you.
First published in 1964, the book reads as a set of instructions through which the work of art is completed-either literally or in the imagination of the viewer participant.
She and Cox divorced on February 2, 1969.
He's a millionaire!
Viewers hammered a nail into a wooden board, creating the art piece.
For someone who went through the 60s revolution, there has of course been an incredible change.
Ono grew up in Tokyo, and studied at Gakushuin.
Ono returned to Liverpool for the 2008 Liverpool Biennial, where she unveiled ''Sky Ladders'' in the ruins of Church of St Luke (which was largely destroyed during World War II and now stands roofless as a memorial to those killed in the Liverpool Blitz).
The song reached No.
It demonstrates the reciprocity between artists, objects, and viewers and the responsibility beholders have to the reception and preservation of art."
Ono influenced Lennon to produce more "autobiographical" output and, after "The Ballad of John and Yoko", they decided it would be better to form their own band rather than put the material out under the Beatles name.
Sean has followed in his parents' footsteps with a musical career, performing solo work, working with Ono, and forming a band, the Ghost of a Saber Tooth Tiger.
Lennon compositions, but neither Lennon nor Ono objected.
58 and gaining major underground airplay.
Ono and her third husband John Lennon searched for Kyoko for years, to no avail.
Ono is often associated with the Fluxus group, whose founder George Maciunas, her friend during the 1960s, admired and promoted her work enthusiastically, giving Ono her US show at his AG Gallery in 1961.
Of the piece, John Hendricks in the catalogue to Ono's Japan Society retrospective wrote: "''Cut Piece'' unveils the interpersonal alienation that characterizes social relationships between subjects, dismantling the disinterested Kantian aesthetic model.....
Ono was enrolled in Keimei Gakuen, an exclusive Christian primary school run by the Mitsui family.
The piece, titled ''My Mummy Was Beautiful'', was dedicated to Lennon's mother, Julia, who had died when he was a teenager.
In 2005, she received a lifetime achievement award from the Japan Society of New York, which had hosted ''Yes Yoko Ono'' and where she had worked in the late 1950s and early 1960s.
American avant-garde artist, composer, and musician La Monte Young, her first important contact in the New York art world, helped Ono start her career by using her Chambers Street loft in Tribeca as a performance space.
", but nevertheless, Ono did not sue.
Courtney Love, Kurt Cobain's widow, has endlessly been compared to Ono for her supposed bothersome role in Nirvana's businesses and as a scapegoat for Cobain's suicide.
Visiting galleries and art happenings in the city whetted her desire to display her own artistic endeavors publicly.
'So it was positive.
In 2002, McCartney released another live album, ''Back in the U.S. Live 2002'', and the 19 Beatles songs included are described as "composed by Paul McCartney and John Lennon", which reignited the debate over credits with Ono.
They planned another Bed-In in the US, but were denied entry to the country.
We're all sisters together."
1 hit on the Dance/Club Play chart with "I'm Not Getting Enough".
In March 2015, Perrie Edwards, member of English girl group Little Mix, was compared to Yoko Ono and criticised for being the supposed reason for Zayn Malik's departure from the British boy band One Direction, creating tension within the group and causing widespread controversy.
"I realized that for something to move me so much that I would cry, there's something there.
On February 16, 2010, Sean organized a concert at the Brooklyn Academy of Music called "We Are Plastic Ono Band", at which Yoko performed her music with Sean, Clapton, Klaus Voormann, and Jim Keltner for the first time since the 1970s.
Ono was also an experimental filmmaker who made 16 short films between 1964 and 1972, gaining particular renown for a 1966 Fluxus film called simply ''No.
One example is "Hide and Seek Piece: Hide until everybody goes home.
Miles thought Ono's continual presence in the studio during the latter part of the Beatles' career put strain on Lennon's relationship with the other band members.
In early 1968, while the Beatles were making their famous visit to India, Lennon wrote "Julia" and included a reference to Ono: "Ocean child calls me", referring to the translation of Yoko's Japanese spelling.
In it, she explored slightly more conventional psychedelic rock with tracks including "Midsummer New York" and "Mind Train", in addition to a number of Fluxus experiments.
The couple separated in July 1973, with Ono pursuing her career and Lennon living between Los Angeles and New York with personal assistant May Pang, with Ono's blessing.
