Portugal permitted the United States to use a leased base in the Azores, and the defence minister of the Netherlands, apparently acting without consulting his cabinet colleagues, secretly authorised the use of Dutch airfields.
"It is not reasonable to become engaged in a war with the United States because of Egypt and Syria," said Premier Alexei Kosygin, while KGB chief Yuri Andropov added that "We shall not unleash the Third World War."
General Sharon advocated an immediate crossing at Deversoir at the northern edge of Great Bitter Lake.
400 of these fell into Israeli hands in good working order and were incorporated into Israeli service.
Examples of these commemorations are 6th October Bridge in Cairo and the cities of 6th of October and 10th of Ramadan.
MIM-23 Hawk, MIM-72 Chaparral, Bofors 40 mm gun
It is a national holiday in Syria as well, where it is called "Tishreen Liberation Day".
The Syrians, having been thoroughly defeated by Israel, were attempting to use their captives as their sole bargaining chip in the post-war negotiations.
Several minutes before the ceasefire came into effect, three Scud missiles were fired at Israeli targets by either Egyptian forces or Soviet personnel in Egypt.
Egyptian losses were higher, especially in the sector controlled by General Ariel Sharon, who ordered his troops to respond with massive firepower to any Egyptian provocation.
Early on October 18, the Soviets showed Sadat satellite imagery of Israeli forces operating on the west bank.
Garwych, citing Egyptian sources, documented Egyptian tank losses up to October 13 at 240.
The next morning, the Egyptians agreed to the American suggestion, and dropped their request for assistance from the Soviets, bringing the crisis to an end.
Having practiced on the Golan Heights numerous times, Israeli gunners made effective use of mobile artillery.
One of the most famous Israeli POWs was Avraham Lanir, an Israeli pilot who bailed out over Syria and was taken prisoner.
United States President Jimmy Carter invited both Sadat and Begin to a summit at Camp David to negotiate a final peace.
One source estimated that the Egyptians had 70,000 men, 720 tanks and 994 artillery pieces on the east bank of the canal.
This assessment was challenged by Patrick Seale, who stated that the Third Army was "on the brink of collapse".
Sadat also backed the claim of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) to the West Bank and Gaza and, in the event of a victory, promised Yasser Arafat that he would be given control of them.
At the start of the war, there were an estimated 2,000 Soviet personnel in Syria, of whom 1,000 were serving in Syrian air defense units.
They were soon joined by tanks ferried on motorized rafts and additional infantry.
General Shazly had angered Sadat for advocating the withdrawal of Egyptian forces from Sinai to meet the Israeli incursion on the West Bank of the Canal.
According to Chaim Herzog, the Egyptians continued attacking the bridgehead until the cease-fire, using artillery and mortars to fire tens of thousands of shells into the area of the crossing.
The Watergate scandal had reached its apex, and Nixon was so agitated and discomposed that they decided to handle the matter without him:
Ultimately, Kissinger took the proposal to Sadat, who agreed.
The brigade's forward elements moved to the Abu Sultan Camp, from where they moved north to take Orcha, an Egyptian logistics base defended by a commando battalion.
If the Syrians had regained the area, it would pose a serious threat to major Israeli cities such as Tiberias, Safed, Haifa and Netanya.
Israeli missile boats utilized their 76mm cannons and other armaments to attack Syrian coastal oil installations, as well as radar stations and other targets of military value on both Syrian and Egyptian coastlines.
Haig clearly shared Kissinger's feelings that Nixon was in no shape to make weighty decisions.
Two frogmen went missing during the operation.
Hussein still saw the West Bank as part of Jordan and wanted it restored to his kingdom.
Individual Israeli soldiers gave testimony of witnessing comrades killed after surrendering to the Egyptians, or seeing the bodies of Israeli soldiers found blindfolded with their hands tied behind their backs.
The same day, Sharon's last remaining unit on the east bank attacked Missouri Ridge.
The Soviets had replaced most of the losses Syria's tank forces had suffered during the first weeks of the war.
There, they were able to fire in support of Israeli troops facing Missouri Ridge, an Egyptian-occupied position on the Bar-Lev Line that could pose a threat to the Israeli crossing.
During the night, Israeli forces successfully held back numerically superior Syrian forces.
Three Israeli divisions broke the first and second defensive lines near Sasa, and conquered a further 50 square kilometres of territory in the Bashan salient.
The Egyptian government claimed that the city was repeatedly bombed by Israeli jets, and that hundreds of civilians were killed or wounded.
In May and August 1973, the Egyptian Army conducted military exercises near the border, and Ashraf Marwan inaccurately warned that Egypt and Syria would launch a surprise attack on May 15.
In spring 1974, the Syrians attempted to retake the summit of Mount Hermon.
On the night of September 25, Hussein secretly flew to Tel Aviv to warn Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir of an impending Syrian attack.
* Tunisia sent 1,000–2,000 soldiers to Egypt, where they were stationed in the Nile Delta and some of them were stationed to defend Port Said.
The 2nd and 3rd Armies were ordered to attack eastward in six simultaneous thrusts over a broad front, leaving behind five infantry divisions to hold the bridgeheads.
Syrian Brigadier-General Omar Abrash was killed on the third day of the fighting when his command tank was hit as he was preparing for an attack.
On the Syrian front, skirmishes and artillery exchanges continued taking place.
On October 7, the bridgeheads were enlarged an additional 4&nbsp;km, at the same time repulsing Israeli counterattacks.
Also on the west bank, in the second line, were an additional 600 tanks for the defense of Cairo.
Israeli commandos from Shayetet 13, the Israeli Navy's elite special unit, infiltrated the Egyptian port of Hurghada on the night of October 9–10 and sank a Komar-class missile boat after four previous attempts had failed.
The Egyptians prevented Israeli forces from reinforcing the Bar Lev Line and proceeded to attack the Israeli fortifications.
The tiny Golan Heights were too small to act as an effective territorial buffer, unlike the Sinai Peninsula in the south, but it proved to be a strategic geographical stronghold and was a crucial key in preventing the Syrians from bombarding the cities below.
The fighting lasted for more than a month and saw heavy losses on both sides, but the Israelis held their positions.
"Who could have imagined the Americans would be so easily frightened," said Nikolai Podgorny.
Moreover, there were the difficulties in supplying this force, in evacuating it, in the lengthy communication lines, and in the daily attrition in men and equipment.
Kuwait also provided financial aid.
The panorama, the creation of which was outsourced to a group of North Korean artists and architects, is equipped with engines to rotate it 360° during a 30-minutes presentation accompanied by commentary in various languages.
Some favored disengagement, which would allow soldiers to be redeployed to the Sinai (Shmuel Gonen's defeat at Hizayon in the Sinai had taken place two days earlier).
They could finally utilize their advantages in speed, maneuver and tank gunnery, areas in which they excelled.
* Lebanon sent radar units to Syria for air defense.
In the Golan Heights, the Syrians attacked two Israeli brigades and eleven artillery batteries with five divisions (the 7th, 9th and 5th, with the 1st and 3rd in reserve) and 188 batteries.
The Israelis had also taken many prisoners after Egyptian soldiers, including many officers, began surrendering in masses towards the end of the war.
On June 19, 1967, shortly after the Six-Day War, the Israeli government voted to return the Sinai to Egypt and the Golan Heights to Syria in return for peace agreements.
He was warning of Israel's impending total defeat, but "Temple" was also the code word for nuclear weapons.
Adan also captured Fayid Airport, which was subsequently prepared by Israeli crews to serve as a supply base and to fly out wounded soldiers.
The sealift may have included Soviet nuclear weapons, which were not unloaded but kept in Alexandria harbor until November to counter the Israeli nuclear preparations, which Soviet satellites had detected.
Egypt and Syria resorted to communicating via a Jordanian radio station in Ajloun, bouncing the signals off a U.S. satellite.
Israeli infantrymen cleared the trenches and bunkers, often engaging in hand-to-hand combat, as tanks moved alongside them and fired into the trench sections to their front.
Moreover, Israeli forces were also pulled back on the length of the whole front to create security zones for Egypt, UN and Israel, each roughly ten kilometres wide.
Dayan again raised the nuclear topic in a cabinet meeting, warning that the country was approaching a point of "last resort".
The Battles of Latakia and Baltim "drastically changed the operational situation at sea to Israeli advantage".
The Egyptians did much to further this misconception.
The front was quieter in the Second Army's sector in the northern canal area, where both sides generally respected the ceasefire.
The documents reveal that Israel and Jordan had a tacit understanding that the Jordanian units would try to stay out of the fighting and Israel would try to not attack them.
The battle also established the Israeli Navy, long derided as the "black sheep" of the Israeli military, as a formidable and effective force in its own right.
Egyptian forces then consolidated their initial positions.
It arrived on October 28, too late to participate in the war.
He advocated withdrawing most of Egypt's armor from the east bank to confront the growing Israeli threat on the west bank.
Some Israeli POWs reported having their fingernails ripped out while others were described as being turned into human ashtrays as their Syrian guards burned them with lit cigarettes.
The role of the superpowers, too, was a major factor in the outcome of the two wars.
The Israeli patrol boats sank both Zodiacs and the patrol boat, though both suffered damage during the battle.
One of Egypt's undeclared objectives in the War of Attrition was to force the Soviet Union to supply Egypt with more advanced arms and materiel.
In July 1974, Israeli Defense Minister Shimon Peres informed the Knesset that high-ranking Soviet officers had been killed on the Syrian front during the war.
The total cost of the equipment was approximately US$800 million (US$ today).
He stressed the need to "implement" the ceasefire resolution and "invited" the U.S. to join the Soviets "to compel observance of the cease-fire without delay".
He pointed to one engagement, which involved elements of the 1st Infantry Brigade, attached to the 19th Division, which captured Ayoun Mousa, south of Suez.
Adan's drive south had left Israeli and Egyptian units scattered throughout the battlefield, with no clear lines between them.
Preparatory to the tank attack, Egyptian helicopters set down 100 commandos near the Lateral Road to disrupt the Israeli rear.
The Egyptians held a narrow strip on the east bank of the canal, occupying some 1,200 square kilometres of the Sinai.
The Syrians had expected it to take at least 24 hours for Israeli reserves to reach the front lines; in fact, reserve units began reaching the battle lines only 15 hours after the war began.
These forces were to prove critical during the early days of the war.
The Israelis destroyed one Syrian missile battery and lost six aircraft.
One Israeli Phantom was shot down.
It would take four days to shift a division to the Sinai.
He then turned southward and ambushed the 25th Independent Armored Brigade, destroying 86 of its 96 tanks and all of its APCs while losing three tanks.
Israel subsequently withdrew its troops and settlers in the Sinai, in exchange for normal relations with Egypt and a lasting peace, with last Israeli troops exiting on April 26, 1982.
Attacks on SAM sites punched a hole in the Egyptian anti-aircraft screen and enabled the Israeli Air Force to strike Egyptian ground targets more aggressively.
Both sides launched small-scale attacks, and the Egyptians used helicopters to land commandos behind Israeli lines.
Having decisively beaten the Egyptian and Syrian navies, the Israeli Navy had the run of the coastlines.
The upper floors of the Syrian GHQ and the Air Force Command were badly damaged.
By the end of the war, the Israelis had advanced to positions some 101 kilometres from Egypt's capital, Cairo, and occupied 1,600 square kilometres west of the Suez Canal.
The Israelis managed to occupy one-third of Missouri Ridge.
On October 12, Kissinger ordered the U.S. Interest Section in Cairo to speed up preparations for the departure of U.S. tourists staying in Egypt, while notifying such actions to the IDF in order to avoid accidental military operations against them.
Following the UN ceasefire, there were constant artillery exchanges and skirmishes, and Israeli forces continued to occupy positions deep within Syria.
He was given a quick hearing and sentenced to death; his execution was immediate.
The Egyptian Air Force attempted to interdict IAF sorties and attack Israeli ground forces, but suffered heavy losses in dogfights and from Israeli air defenses, while inflicting light aircraft losses on the Israelis.
Zamir would later remark that "We simply didn't feel them capable of war."
In one key engagement on October 13, Koah Patzi destroyed a particularly large incursion and killed close to a hundred Egyptian commandos.
Algerian fighter jets however did participate in attacks together with Egyptians and Iraqis.
According to historian Assaf David, declassified U.S. documents show that the Jordanian participation was only a token to preserve King Hussein's status in the Arab world.
He then reviewed the prospects for a peace agreement, which he termed "quite promising", and had conciliatory words for Israel, Egypt and even the USSR.
Brigade Commander Colonel Shoham was killed on the second day, along with his second-in-command and operations officer, as the Syrians desperately tried to advance towards the Sea of Galilee and Nafah.
At least 250 Egyptian tanks and some 200 armored vehicles were destroyed.
Moreover, during the Black September crisis of 1970, a near civil war had broken out between the PLO and the Jordanian government.
In Egypt, many places were named after the date of ''October 6th'' and ''Ramadan'' ''10th'', which is the equivalent day in the Islamic calendar.
The United Nations Security Council passed (14–0) Resolution 338 calling for a ceasefire, largely negotiated between the U.S. and Soviet Union, on October 22.
As a result, the city was partitioned down the main street, with the Egyptians holding the city center and the Israelis controlling the outskirts, port installations and oil refinery, effectively surrounding the Egyptian defenders.
The Arab armies (with the exception of the Jordanians), were equipped with predominantly Soviet-made weapons while Israel's armaments were mostly Western-made.
Thus, in November of that year, Sadat took the unprecedented step of visiting Israel, becoming the first Arab leader to do so, and so implicitly recognized Israel.
Iraq and Syria also had strained relations, and the Iraqis refused to join the initial offensive.
* North Korea was reported to have sent pilots to fly for the Egyptian Air Force.
In his biography of Sadat, Raphael Israeli argued that Sadat felt the root of the problem was the great shame over the Six-Day War, and before any reforms could be introduced, he believed that that shame had to be overcome.
Sharon's 143rd Division, now reinforced with a paratroop brigade commanded by Colonel Danny Matt, was tasked with establishing bridgeheads on the east and west banks of the canal.
Disengagement talks took place on October 28, 1973, at "Kilometre 101" between Israeli Major General Aharon Yariv and Egyptian Major General Abdel Ghani el-Gamasy.
After another infiltration attempt failed, the commandos successfully infiltrated Hurghada again on the night of October 21–22 and heavily damaged a missile boat with M72 LAW rockets.
The peace discussion at the end of the war was the first time that Arab and Israeli officials met for direct public discussions since the aftermath of the 1948 war.
The Soviets thought little of Sadat's chances in any war.
Adan was also harassed by the Egyptian Air Force.
* Aman Chief, Aluf Eli Zeira, and his deputy, head of Research, Brigadier-General Aryeh Shalev, were recommended for dismissal.
The IDF also destroyed the Syrian missile defense system.
By the beginning of December, Israel had received between 34 to 40 F-4 fighter-bombers, 46 A-4 attack airplanes, 12 C-130 cargo airplanes, 8 CH-53 helicopters, 40 unmanned aerial vehicles, 200 M-60/M-48A3 tanks, 250 armored personnel carriers, 226 utility vehicles, 12 MIM-72 Chaparral surface-to-air missile systems, 3 MIM-23 Hawk surface-to-air missile systems, 36 155&nbsp;mm artillery pieces, 7 175&nbsp;mm artillery pieces, large quantities of 105&nbsp;mm, 155&nbsp;mm and 175&nbsp;mm ammunition, state of the art equipment, such as the AGM-65 Maverick missile and the BGM-71 TOW, weapons that had only entered production one or more years prior, as well as highly advanced electronic jamming equipment.
Under cover of the initial artillery barrage, the Egyptian assault force of 32,000 infantry began crossing the canal in twelve waves at five separate crossing areas, from 14:05 to 17:30, in what became known as The Crossing.
Adan's brigades met resistance from dug-in Egyptian forces in the Sweetwater Canal area's greenbelt.
The Israeli blockade substantially damaged the Egyptian economy.
An IDF D9 bulldozer supported by infantry forced its way to the peak.
As the Syrian position deteriorated, Jordan sent an expeditionary force into Syria.
Following their victory in the Six-Day War, the Israeli military had become complacent.
On October 9, the IDF chose to concentrate its reserves and build up its supplies while the Egyptians remained on the strategic defensive.
The Egyptians also made minor gains in attacks against Sharon's forces in the Ismailia area.
They claimed he was killed in battle with Israel and threatened severe punishment to anyone repeating the allegation of execution.
The air attacks were ineffective overall, as the sectional design of the bridges enabled quick repairs when hit.
Both the Israelis and the Americans felt that the expulsion of the Soviet military observers had severely reduced the effectiveness of the Egyptian army.
Sadat was assassinated two years later on October 6, 1981, while attending a parade marking the eighth anniversary of the start of the war, by Islamist army members who were outraged at his negotiations with Israel.
The Egyptian 1st Mechanized Brigade launched a failed attack southward along the Gulf of Suez in the direction of Ras Sudar.
Egypt was suspended from the Arab League until 1989.
Seale's position was supported by P.R.
Other IDF forces attacked entrenched Egyptian forces overlooking the roads to the canal.
Another Syrian attack north of Quneitra was repulsed.
On the night of October 15, 20 Israeli tanks and 7 APCs under the command of Colonel Haim Erez crossed the canal and penetrated 12 kilometres into mainland Egypt, taking the Egyptians by surprise.
The offensive was code-named Operation Stouthearted Men or alternatively, Operation Valiant.
The Israelis slowly advanced, bypassing Egyptian positions whenever possible.
An unknown number of Syrians were also killed and some were taken prisoner.
For the first 24 hours, Erez's force attacked SAM sites and military columns with impunity.
The Soviets ultimately reacted by deploying two destroyers off the Syrian coast.
''The Observer'' wrote that seven Soviets in uniform were taken prisoner after surrendering when the Israelis overran their bunker.
Adan's troops advanced through the greenbelt and fought their way to the Geneifa Hills, clashing with scattered Egyptian, Kuwaiti, and Palestinian troops.
According to the Israelis, the IDF bridgehead was  wide and  deep by the end of October 21.
On October 11, Israeli missile boats sank two Syrian missile boats in an engagement off Tartus.
Shazly's account was disputed by Kenneth Pollack, who noted that for the most part, the forts only fell to repeated assaults by superior forces or prolonged sieges over many days.
''Non-state participants'':
Codenamed ''Doogman 5'', the attempt was a costly failure.
El Al planes flew in an additional 5,500 tons of matériel in 170 flights.
The Arab position, as it emerged in September 1967 at the Khartoum Arab Summit, was to reject any peaceful settlement with the state of Israel.
Siman-Tov sent a more comprehensive assessment on October 3.
Israeli jets had carried out hundreds of sorties against Egyptian targets by the following day, but the Egyptian SAM shield inflicted heavy losses.
Kissinger concluded his remarks by spelling out the principles of a new U.S. policy toward the Arab–Israeli conflict saying:
Sharon's second brigade began to cross the canal.
Photographic evidence of such executions exists, though some of it has never been made public.
By the following morning, some 850 tanks had crossed the canal.
Kenneth Pollack credited a successful Israeli commando raid early on October 14 against an Egyptian signals-intercept site at Jebel Ataqah with seriously disrupting Egyptian command and control and contributing to its breakdown during the engagement.
The Israeli blockade was enforced by naval vessels based at Sharm el-Sheikh and the Sinai coast facing the Gulf of Suez.
Israeli historian Aryeh Yitzhaki estimated that the Egyptians killed about 200 Israeli soldiers who had surrendered.
The Egyptian attack was decisively repelled.
During the last week of the war, Egyptian frogmen carried out three or four raids on Eilat.
Both the Soviets and Americans were then pursuing détente and had no interest in seeing the Middle East destabilized.
Lastly, they approved a message to Sadat (again, in Nixon's name) asking him to drop his request for Soviet assistance, and threatening that if the Soviets were to intervene, so would the United States.
Kuwaiti troops were also sent to Egypt.
By that time, the IDF had advanced deep into Syria and was mounting a largely successful invasion of the Egyptian mainland from the Sinai, but had taken severe material losses.
The fighting there was conducted at close quarters, and was sometimes hand-to-hand.
According to Herzog, 334 of these aircraft were shot down by the Israeli Air Force in air-to-air combat for the loss of only five Israeli planes.
Israeli engineers under Brigadier-General Dan Even had worked under heavy Egyptian fire to set up the bridges, and over 100 were killed and hundreds more wounded.
Conditions for a crossing were good, it was a fast day in Israel, and the moon on that day, 10 Ramadan, shone from sunset until midnight."
Until then, Egypt had been "at the helm of the Arab world".
Sharon hoped to seize the city and thereby sever the logistical and supply lines for most of the Egyptian Second Army.
Egyptian casualties exceeded 1,000.
Another Egyptian–Israeli disengagement agreement, the ''Sinai Interim Agreement'', was signed in Geneva on September 4, 1975, and was commonly known as Sinai II.
Israeli troops finished the drive south, captured the last ancillary road south of the port of Suez, and encircled the Egyptian Third Army east of the Suez Canal.
He explained further by saying: "Saturday 6 October 1973 (10 Ramadan 1393) was the day chosen for the September–October option.
Israeli Defense Minister Moshe Dayan declined to offer any such assurance, but said that Israel had no intention of opening another front.
In his account of the war, Saad El Shazly noted that by the morning of October 7, the Egyptians had lost 280 soldiers and 20 tanks, though this account is disputed.
During the war, blackouts were enforced in major cities.
This view was contradicted by another source that stated that few commandos made it to their objectives, and were usually nothing more than a nuisance.
On October 16, he dispatched Amnon Reshef's Brigade to attack the Chinese Farm.
Aman was also aware of many details of the Syrian war plan.
The tide in the Golan began to turn as arriving Israeli reserve forces were able to contain the Syrian advance.
However, the day before the offensive was to begin, the United Nations imposed its ceasefire (following the acquiescence of both Israel and Egypt).
Some Egyptian helicopters were shot down, and those commando forces that managed to land were quickly destroyed by Koah Patzi, a twelve-man squad consisting of officers from the Sayeret Shaked unit.
A summit conference in Geneva followed in December 1973.
Others favored continuing the attack into Syria, towards Damascus, which would knock Syria out of the war; it would also restore Israel's image as the supreme military power in the Middle East and would give Israel a valuable bargaining chip once the war ended.
At 2:00&nbsp;pm on October 6, Operation Badr began with a large airstrike.
On October 11, Israeli forces pushed into Syria and advanced towards Damascus along the Quneitra-Damascus road until October 14, encountering stiff resistance by Syrian reservists in prepared defenses.
Most of the combat airplanes arrived during the war, and many were taken directly from United States Air Force units.
