Guy Fawkes, who was born and educated in York, was a member of a group of Roman Catholic restorationists that planned the Gunpowder Plot.
In 2007 Oaklands Sports College and Lowfield Comprehensive School merged to become one school known as York High School.
The ''ings'' are flood meadows along the Ouse, while the ''strays'' are open common grassland in various locations around the city.
In 2010 York's city council and a number of heritage organisations submitted a bid for York's entire city centre to become a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
Horse theft was a capital offence.
Archaeological evidence suggests that Mesolithic people settled in the region of York between 8000 and 7000&nbsp;BC, although it is not known whether their settlements were permanent or temporary.
On 27 November 2013, Ofcom awarded the 12-year local TV licence for the York area to a consortium entitled The York Channel, with the channel due to be on air in spring 2015.
Since 1974, Home Office policing in York has been provided by the North Yorkshire Police.
LTPs are used by central government to allocate funding for transport schemes.
Alternatively, the word ''eofor'' already existed as an Old Saxon word for ''wild swine'', which is a cognate of the current Low Saxon word ''eaver'' and Dutch ''ever''.
The city's football team is York City who are competing in National League as of the 2016–17 season.
There are 70 local council schools with over 24,000 pupils in the City of York Council area.
The Old French and Norman name of the city following the Norman Conquest was recorded as "Everwic" (modern Norman "Évèroui") in works such as Wace's Roman de Rou.
The city was the location of significant unrest during the so-called Peasants' Revolt in 1381.
Because of its lowland location York is prone to frosts, fog, and cold winds during winter, spring and very early summer.
In the 19th&nbsp;century, York became a hub of the railway network and a confectionery manufacturing centre.
'''York''' () is a historic walled city at the confluence of the rivers Ouse and Foss in North Yorkshire, England.
In the centre of York, in St Helen's Square, there is the York branch of Bettys Café Tea Rooms.
York's economy is based on the service industry, which in 2000 was responsible for 88.7% of employment in the city.
The rowing clubs of The University of York, York St John University Rowing Club and Leeds University Boat Club as well as York City RC use the Ouse for training.
One of the notable local products is York ham, a mild-flavoured ham with delicate pink colouring.
Around the year 1080 Archbishop Thomas started building the cathedral that in time became the current Minster.
From 11–16 education is provided by 10 secondary schools, four of which offer additional education up to the age of 18.
In 2012, the York Mystery Plays were performed between 2 and 27 August at St. Mary's Abbey in the York Museum Gardens.
The city offers a wealth of historic attractions, of which York Minster is the most prominent, and a variety of cultural and sporting activities making it a popular tourist destination for millions.
This major horseracing venue is located on the Knavesmire and sees thousands flocking to the city every year for the 15 race meetings.
(For instance the Shipwrights' Play is the ''Building of Noah's Ark'' and the fish-sellers and mariners the ''Landing of Noah's Ark'').
In December 2015 the flooding was more extensive and caused major disruption.
The Anglo-Saxon newcomers probably interpreted the ''ebor'' part as ''eofor'', and ''-rac'' as ''ric'' (meaning ''rich''), while ''-um'' was (and is) a common abbreviation of the Saxon ''-heem'', meaning ''home''.
It became the capital of the Roman province of Britannia Inferior, and later of the kingdoms of Northumbria and Jórvík.
Two schools have Quaker origins: Bootham School is co-educational and The Mount School is all-girls.
The York area is served by a local newspaper, ''The Press'' (known as the ''Evening Press'' until April 2006), ''The York Advertiser'' newspaper (based at ''The Press'' on Walmgate), and three local radio stations Minster FM, Vale Radio and BBC Radio York.
York's location on the River Ouse and in the centre of the Vale of York means that it has always had a significant position in the nation's transport system.
Henry VIII restored his authority by establishing  the Council of the North in York in the dissolved St Mary's Abbey.
He had a long career as a teacher and scholar, first at the school at York now known as St Peter's School, founded in 627&nbsp;AD, and later as Charlemagne's leading advisor on ecclesiastical and educational affairs.
Plans have been drafted to expand the site for business aviation or a full commercial service.
Its aim was to displace Protestant rule by blowing up the Houses of Parliament while King James I, the entire Protestant, and even most of the Catholic aristocracy and nobility were inside.
The Academy of St Olave's, a chamber orchestra which gives concerts in St Olave's Church, Marygate, is one of the music groups that perform regularly in York.
Tourism has become an important element of the economy, with the city offering a wealth of historic attractions, of which York Minster is the most prominent, and a variety of cultural activities.
The first minster church was built in York for the baptism of Edwin in 627.
Of those aged 16–74 in York, 24.6% had no academic qualifications, a little lower than 28.9% in all of England.
York Racecourse was established in 1731 and from 1990 has been awarded Northern Racecourse of the Year for 17 years running.
Under the requirements of the Municipal Corporations Act 1835, York City Council appointed a watch committee which established a police force and appointed a chief constable.
The department hosts an annual festival of student work and a showcase of other regional films.
In 1069, after another rebellion, William built another timbered castle across the River Ouse.
It was announced on 20 September 2006 that Nestlé would cut 645 jobs at the Rowntree's chocolate factory in York.
Most industry around the railway has gone, including the carriage works (known as Asea Brown Boveri or ABB at the time of closure), which at its height in the 1880s employed 5,500 people but closed in the mid-1990s.
The existing tourist attractions were supplemented by the establishment of the National Railway Museum in York in 1975 and the Jorvik Viking Centre in 1984.
Welsh ''-og'') meaning either "place of the yew trees" (cf.
Between 1998 and 2008 York gained 80 new technology companies and 2,800 new jobs in the sector.
Extremes recorded at the University of York campus between 1998 and 2010 include a highest temperature of  (Monday 17 July 2006) and a lowest temperature of  (Monday 6 December 2010).
Employers with more than 2,000 staff include Aviva (formerly Norwich Union Life), Network Rail, Northern, York Hospitals NHS Trust and the University of York.
Since the closure of the carriage-works, the site has been developed into offices.
Its radio station URY is the longest running legal independent radio station in the UK, and was voted BBC Radio 1 Student Radio Station of the Year 2005.
Reclamation of the flooded parts of the town was initiated in the 7th&nbsp;century under King Edwin of Northumbria, and York became his chief city.
In 2009, York was the 7th most visited city by UK residents and the 13th most visited by overseas visitors.
The University of York also has a highly rated medical school, Hull York Medical School.
The last significant traffic was the supply of newsprint to the local newspaper's Foss-side print works, which continued until 1997.
During Roman times, the land surrounding the rivers Ouse and Foss was marshy, making the site easy to defend.
Snow can fall in winter from December onwards to as late as April but quickly melts.
The Ouse was originally a tidal river, accessible to seagoing ships of the time.
The city lies at the intersection of the A19 road from Doncaster to Tyneside, the A59 road from Liverpool to York, the A64 road from Leeds to Scarborough, and the A1079 road from York to Hull.
The library was extended in 1934 and 1938.
The number of theft-from-a-vehicle offences and theft of a vehicle per 1,000 of the population was 8.8 and 2.7, compared to the English national average of 6.9 and 2.7 respectively.
York Minster was the origin (meridian) of the 6 inch and 1:2500 Ordnance Survey maps for Yorkshire.
It has its origins in the 13th century, when an Assize of Bread and Ale was used to regulate the quality of goods.
York was voted European Tourism City of the Year by European Cities Marketing in June 2007 beating 130 other European cities to gain first place, surpassing Gothenburg in Sweden (second) and Valencia in Spain (third).
Yorkshire Water, which has a local water extraction plant on the River Derwent at Elvington, manages York's drinking and waste water.
The culprits of lesser crimes were brought to court by the city constables and would face a fine.
Originally performed from wagons at various locations around the city from the fourteenth century until 1570, they were revived in 1951 during the Festival of Britain, when York was one of the cities with a regional festival.
This led to the Pilgrimage of Grace, an uprising of northern Catholics in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire opposed to religious reform.
The barbican at Walmgate Bar was undermined and explosives laid, but, the plot was discovered.
The service industries include public sector employment, health, education, finance, information technology (IT) and tourism that accounts for 10.7% of employment.
William at once built a wooden fortress on a motte.
There are three amateur rugby league teams in York, New Earswick All Blacks, York Acorn and Heworth.
Local arts, culture news and events are covered by community media start-up; and  social enterprise; One&Other.
In August racing takes place over the four-day Ebor Festival that includes the Ebor Handicap dating from 1843.
The remains of the rebuilt castles, now in stone, are visible on either side of the River Ouse.
Askham Bryan College offers further education courses, foundation and honours degrees, specialising in more vocational subjects such as horticulture, agriculture, animal management and even golf course management.
At the turn of the 20th&nbsp;century, the railway accommodated the headquarters and works of the North Eastern Railway, which employed more than 5,500 people.
The last ruler of an independent Jórvík, Eric Bloodaxe, was driven from the city in 954&nbsp;AD by King Eadred in his successful attempt to complete the unification of England.
Another digital news website is YorkMix run by former print journalists, that incorporates Local News; What's On; Food & Drink; Things To Do and Business sections with article written by residents and local journalists.
A few years after Bettys opened in York war broke out, and the basement 'Bettys Bar' became a favourite haunt of the thousands of airmen stationed around York.
York's many elegant townhouses, such as the Lord Mayor's Mansion House and Fairfax House date from this period, as do the Assembly Rooms, the Theatre Royal, and the racecourse.
Folklore has it that the oak construction for York Minster provided the sawdust for smoking the ham.
The current version was resurrected in the 1990s by the Sheriff of York and is led by the Guild of Scriveners.
The key aims of the plan are to ease congestion and improve accessibility, air quality and safety.
As a consequence many of the routes inside the city walls are designated as car free during business hours or restrict traffic entirely.
York was the location of the first implementation of FirstGroup's experimental, and controversial, ftr bus concept, which sought to confer the advantages of a modern tramway system at a lower cost.
Leeds Bradford Airport is closer to York but the hourly ''York Air Coach'' service operated by First York was withdrawn as of April 2009.
He was so impressed by the splendour of the ship that he employed the Queen Mary's designers and craftsmen to turn a dilapidated furniture store in York into an elegant café in St Helen's Square.
The north-east section includes a part where walls never existed, because the Norman moat of York Castle, formed by damming the River Foss, also created a lake which acted as a city defence.
The form ''York'' was first recorded in the 13th&nbsp;century.
In 2011 the urban area had a population of 153,717, while in 2010 the entire unitary authority had an estimated population of 202,400.
St Columba's United Reformed Church in Priory Street, originally built for the Presbyterians, dates from 1879.
The city acquired an increasing degree of autonomy from central government including the privileges granted by a charter of Richard II in 1396.
Other Christian denominations that are active in York include the Religious Society of Friends who have a number of meeting houses, Methodists within the York Circuit of The Methodist Church York and Hull District, and Unitarians.
In 1931 the track staged team and open events and the York team took part in the National Trophy.
The Parliamentarians retreated some  from York with Rupert in pursuit, before turning on his army and soundly defeating it at the Battle of Marston Moor.
When the Danish army conquered the city in 866, its name became ''Jórvík''.
In 1893 the first free public library, the York Library, was built to mark Queen Victoria's jubilee.
Under Viking rule the city became a major river port, part of the extensive Viking trading routes throughout northern Europe.
In 1068, two years after the Norman Conquest of England, the people of York rebelled.
This indirectly led to the city making a successful bid to be part of the UNESCO Creative Cities Network as a city of ''Media Arts''.
The entire circuit is approximately , and encloses an area of .
Other major employers include British Telecom, CPP Group, Nestlé, NFU Mutual and a number of railway companies.
At the time of the 2011 UK census the population of York was 198,051 and its ethnic composition was 94.3% white, compared with the English average of 85.5%.
The Emperors Hadrian, Septimius Severus and Constantius I all held court in York during their various campaigns.
Public transport within the city is largely bus based.
It is housed in a marquee opposite the grandstand of the racecourse in the enclosure and in 2016 will offer over 450 real ales and over 100 ciders.
Other forms of health care are provided for locally by clinics and surgeries.
Today navigation is almost exclusively leisure-oriented.
Amateur side York Lokomotive compete in the Rugby League Conference.
Open top tourist and sightseeing buses are operated by Transdev York on behalf of City Sightseeing.
The figures for lone parent households were below the national average of 9.5%, and the percentage of married couples was also close to the national average of 36.5%; the proportion of one person households was slightly higher than the national average of 30.1%.
Photographers who had studios in York included William Hayes, William Pumphrey, and Augustus Mahalski who operated on Davygate and Low Petergate in the 19th century having come to England as a refugee after serving as a Polish lancer in the Austro-Hungarian war.
As with the rest of the Vale of York the city's climate is drier and warmer than the rest of the Yorkshire and Humberside region.
The city's first subscription library opened in 1794.
It was York's only institution with university status until 2006, when the more centrally located York St John University, formerly an autonomous college of the University of Leeds, attained full university status.
Since 1998 waste management has been co-ordinated via the York and North Yorkshire Waste Partnership.
The Shambles is a narrow medieval street, lined with shops, boutiques and tea rooms.
Included in this collection are the world's fastest steam locomotive LNER Class A4 4468 ''Mallard'' and the world-famous LNER Class A3 4472 ''Flying Scotsman'', which has been overhauled in the Museum.
The city has become a founding National Science City with the creation of a science park near the University of York.
Most of these premises were once butchers' shops, and the hooks from which carcasses were hung and the shelves on which meat was laid out can still be seen outside some of them.
Various Buddhist traditions are represented in the city and around York.
English local authorities are required to produce Local Transport Plans (LTPs), strategies for developing local integrated transport as part of a longer-term vision.
First York operates the majority of the city's local bus services, as well as the York park and ride services.
The fortress, which was later rebuilt in stone, covered an area of  and was inhabited by 6,000 soldiers.
Robert Burrow Atkinson's butchery shop, in Blossom Street, is the birthplace of the original "York Ham" and the reason why the premises became famous.
The Yorkshire Ambulance Service NHS Trust was formed on 1 July 2006 bringing together South Yorkshire Ambulance Service, West Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service and the North and East Yorkshire parts of Tees, East and North Yorkshire Ambulance Service to provide patient transport.
The city was founded in 71&nbsp;AD, when the Ninth Legion conquered the Brigantes and constructed a wooden military fortress on flat ground above the River Ouse close to its confluence with the River Foss.
York's bid failed, leading to 'disappointment' from the team involved.
This came after a number of other job losses in the city at Aviva, British Sugar and Terry's chocolate factory.
The library was on Clifford Street but a new building was erected on Museum Street in 1927 and is still the library today.
The site of the Roman fortress lies under the foundations of York Minster, and excavations in the undercroft have revealed some of the original walls.
The name ''Eboracum'' became the Anglian ''Eoforwic'' in the 7th&nbsp;century: a compound of ''Eofor-'', from the old name, and ''-wic'' a village probably by conflation of the element ''Ebor-'' with a Germanic root ''*eburaz'' (boar); by the 7th&nbsp;century the Old English for 'boar' had become ''eofor''.
The supporters formed a new club, York City Knights, who now play at the same stadium in Championship 1.
It has 524 adult inpatient beds and 127 special purpose beds providing general healthcare and some specialist inpatient, daycase and outpatient services.
Despite this, the employment situation in York remained fairly buoyant until the effects of the late 2000s recession began to be felt.
The city grew up as a river port at the confluence of the River Ouse and the River Foss.
There are two sailing clubs close to York, both of which sail dinghies on the River Ouse.
In June 2015 York CAMRA listed 101 pubs on its map of the city centre, some of which are hundreds of years old.
The final Local Transport Plan 2006–2011 for York was submitted to central government in March 2006.
The station is also served by long distance trains on CrossCountry services linking Edinburgh and Newcastle with destinations in south and west England via Birmingham.
In 2010, the former headquarters on the North Eastern Railway were refurbished and opened as York's first, and still only, 5-star hotel - currently known as The Grand Hotel & Spa.
Students, staff and visiting artists of York St John University music department regularly perform lunchtime concerts in the University chapel.
and on 22 October 2014, it announced the first 'temporal twinning' with Jórvík, the Viking city from 866 to 1066.
In recent decades, the economy of York has moved from being dominated by its confectionery and railway-related industries to one that provides services.
The service was withdrawn following an election manifesto pledge by the Labour Group at the 2011 local government election.
1776 saw the last recorded instance of a wife hanged and burnt for poisoning her husband.
The most rainfall in one day was .
York was a centre of early photography.
An open rowing club York City Rowing Club is located underneath Lendal Bridge.
The city is prone to flooding from the River Ouse, and has an extensive (and until 2015 mostly effective) network of flood defences with walls along the river, and a liftable barrier across the River Foss where it joins the Ouse at the 'Blue Bridge'.
The York RI (Railway Institute) Sailing Club has a club bouse and boat park on the outskirts of Bishopthorpe, a village  to the south of York.
As is common in Saxon place names, the -um part gradually faded; ''eoforic''.
Initially the rebellion was successful but upon the arrival of William the Conqueror the rebellion was put down.
The most notable sportsmen to come from York in recent years are footballer Marco Gabbiadini and former England manager Steve McClaren, who both attended Nunthorpe Grammar School (now called Millthorpe School).
The plan addresses the fact that traffic in York is predicted to grow considerably over the coming years.
As a lightly smoked, dry-cured ham, York ham is saltier but milder in flavour than other European dry-cured hams.
Pupils from The Minster School, York sing in York Minster choir.
Transdev York and also operate a large number of local bus services.
White British form 95% of the population, the largest single minority group was recorded as Asian, at 1.9% of the population.
They are thought to have spoken a Celtic language related to modern Welsh.
It is traditionally served with Madeira Sauce.
See Peter Rex's The English Resistance, The Underground War Against the Normans, 2006.
Their matches are played at Bootham Crescent.
This nomination, to the UK's Department for Culture, Media and Sport would have included York on a list of tentative sites to be reviewed by UNESCO itself.
It is the fourth of these cities, following Lyon, France; Enghien-les-Bains, France; and Sapporo, Japan.
In October and November 2000 York experienced the worst flooding in 375 years with more than 300 homes flooded.
In 866, Northumbria was in the midst of internecine struggles when the Vikings raided and captured York.
The Theatre Royal, which was established in 1744, produces an annual pantomime which attracts loyal audiences from around the country to see its veteran star, Berwick Kaler.
The historic factory building is situated next to the Knavesmire racecourse.
A former church, St Margaret's, Walmgate, is the National Centre for Early Music, which hosts concerts, broadcasts, competitions and events including the York Early Music Festival.
The city's first hospital, York County Hospital, opened in 1740 in Monkgate funded by public subscription.
TransPennine Express provide a frequent service of semi-fast trains linking York to Newcastle, Scarborough, Leeds, Manchester, Manchester Airport, and Liverpool.
York College is an amalgamation of York Technical College and York Sixth Form College.
Between 1773 and 1777, the  Grand Jury House was replaced by John Carr's elegant Court House for the Assizes of the whole county.
The city is surrounded on all sides by an outer ring road, at a distance of some  from the centre of the city, which allows through traffic to by-pass the city.
It closed in 1976 when it was replaced by York Hospital, which opened the same year and gained Foundation status in April 2007.
The city also hosts a branch of The University of Law.
During the later Middle Ages York merchants imported wine from France, cloth, wax, canvas, and oats from the Low Countries, timber and furs from the Baltic and exported grain to Gascony and grain and wool to the Low Countries.
Bettys founder, Frederick Belmont, travelled on the maiden voyage of the ''Queen Mary'' in 1936.
This position continued until the early 1980s when 30% of the workforce were employed by just five employers and 75% of manufacturing jobs were in four companies.
The city is home to the Riding Lights Theatre Company, which as well as operating a busy national touring department, also operates a busy youth theatre and educational departments.
York became a major cloth manufacturing and trading centre.
York has a temperate climate with four distinct seasons.
There is one mosque in York and the city also has a UK Islamic Mission Islamic centre.
On 18 June 2016, York CAMRA undertook a "Beer Census" and found 328 unique real ales being served in over 200 pubs in York, reinforcing the city's reputation as a top UK beer destination.
Local stopping services by Northern connect York to Bridlington, Harrogate, Hull, Leeds, Sheffield and many intermediate points, as well as many other stations across Greater Manchester and Lancashire.
These were destroyed in 1069 and rebuilt by William about the time of his ravaging Northumbria in what is called the "Harrying of the North" where he destroyed everything from York to Durham.
This lake was later called the King's Fishpond, as the rights to fish belonged to the Crown.
Primary schools cover education from ages 5–11, with some offering early years education from age 3.
The siege was renewed but the city could not hold out for long, and on 15 July surrendered to Sir Thomas Fairfax.
The A64 road provides the principal link to the motorway network, linking York to both the A1(M) and the M1 motorways at a distance of about  from the city.
St Peter's School was founded in 627.
The Assize of Ale is an annual event in the city where people in medieval costume take part in a pub crawl to raise money for local charities.
The cycle was presented in the Theatre Royal in 1992 and 1996, within York Minster in 2000 and in 2002, 2006 and 2010 by Guild groups from wagons in the squares, in the Dean's Park, or at the Eye of York.
In the Middle Ages, York grew as a major wool trading centre and became the capital of the northern ecclesiastical province of the Church of England, a role it has retained.
The Brigantian tribal area initially became a Roman client state, but, later its leaders became more hostile and the Roman Ninth Legion was sent north of the Humber into Brigantian territory.
