Other notable television series set in Yorkshire include ''All Creatures Great and Small'', ''The Beiderbecke Trilogy'', ''Rising Damp'', ''Fat Friends'' and ''The Royal''.
In 1996 the East Riding of Yorkshire was reformed as a unitary authority area and a ceremonial county.
Saddleworth (now in Greater Manchester); the Forest of Bowland (Lancashire); Sedbergh and Dent (Cumbria) are in the North West England region, and Upper Teesdale (County Durham) is in North East England.
The English Reformation began under Henry VIII and the Dissolution of the Monasteries in 1536 led to a popular uprising known as Pilgrimage of Grace, started in Yorkshire as a protest.
Three well known sculptors emerged in the 20th century; contemporaries Henry Moore and Barbara Hepworth, and Leeds-raised eco artist Andy Goldsworthy.
Elmet remained independent from the Northumbrian Angles until some time in the early 7th century, when King Edwin of Northumbria expelled its last king, Certic, and annexed the region.
After the Romans left, small Celtic kingdoms arose in Yorkshire; the Kingdom of Ebrauc around York and more notably the Kingdom of Elmet in West Yorkshire.
Eventually the two houses fought for the throne of England in a series of civil wars, commonly known as the Wars of the Roses.
Cartimandua, due to her good relationship with the Romans, was able to keep control of the kingdom; however her former husband staged rebellions against her and her Roman allies.
The most prominent road in Yorkshire, historically called the Great North Road, is known as the A1.
''Wuthering Heights'' was almost a source used to depict life in Yorkshire, illustrating the type of people that reside there in its characters, and emphasising the use of the stormy Yorkshire moors.
As late as the 1970s, the number of miners working in the area was still in six figures.
Historically canals were used, including the Leeds and Liverpool Canal, which is the longest canal in England.
The world's first inter-club match and local derby was competed in the county, at the world's oldest ground Sandygate Road.
In the early 12th century, people of Yorkshire had to contend with the Battle of the Standard at Northallerton with the Scots.
After the Reform Act 1832, Yorkshire's political representation in parliament was drawn from its subdivisions, with Members of Parliament representing each of the three historic Ridings of Yorkshire; East Riding, North Riding, and West Riding constituencies.
The Laws of the Game which are now used worldwide were drafted by Ebenezer Cobb Morley from Hull.
Next, draining Wensleydale, is the River Ure, which the Swale joins east of Boroughbridge.
Yorkshire has a mixed economy.
South Yorkshire is served by the Robin Hood Airport Doncaster Sheffield, based in Finningley.
Yorkshire has a heritage of folk music and folk dance including the Long Sword dance.
Moorman, claimed the first extant work of English literature, ''Beowulf'', was written in Yorkshire, this view does not have common acceptance today.
Among prominent British television shows filmed in (and based on) Yorkshire are the sitcom ''Last of the Summer Wine'', the drama series ''Heartbeat'', and the soap operas ''Emmerdale'' and ''Downton Abbey''.
The people of Yorkshire are immensely proud of their county and local culture and it is sometimes suggested they identify more strongly with their county than they do with their country.
The relationship between Yorkshire and Scottish devolution was again made in 1975 by Richard Wainwright, MP for Colne Valley, who claimed in a speech in the House of Commons:
Yorkshire was represented at this time as one single, large,  county constituency.
The East and North Ridings of Yorkshire were separated by the River Derwent and the West and North Ridings were separated by the Ouse and the Ure/Nidd watershed.
The western boundary meandered along the western slopes of the Pennine Hills to again meet the River Tees.
The East Riding was resurrected with reduced boundaries in 1996 with the abolition of Humberside.
Another well-known author was children's writer Arthur Ransome, who penned the ''Swallows and Amazons'' series.
The East Coast Main Line rail link between Scotland and London runs roughly parallel with the A1 through Yorkshire and the Trans Pennine rail link runs east to west from Hull to Liverpool via Leeds.
However, despite the booming industry, living conditions declined in the industrial towns due to overcrowding, this saw bouts of cholera in both 1832 and 1848.
'''Yorkshire''' ( or ; abbreviated '''Yorks'''), formally known as the '''County of York''', is a historic county of Northern England and the largest in the United Kingdom.
Fortunately for the county, advances were made by the end of the century with the introduction of modern sewers and water supplies.
It is bordered by several other historic counties in the form of County Durham, Lincolnshire, Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, Cheshire, Lancashire and Westmorland.
In western and central Yorkshire the many rivers empty their waters into the River Ouse which reaches the North Sea via the Humber Estuary.
During the English Civil War, which started in 1642, Yorkshire had divided loyalties; Hull famously shut the gates of the city on the king when he came to enter a few months before fighting began, while the North Riding of Yorkshire in particular was strongly royalist.
The two roses of white and red, emblems of the Houses of York and Lancaster respectively, were combined to form the Tudor Rose of England.
The inaugural Tour de Yorkshire was held from 1–3 May 2015, with start and finishes in Bridlington, Leeds, Scarborough, Selby, Wakefield and York, watched by 1.2 million.
(The earldom covered the general area of Yorkshire and is sometimes referred to as the ''Earl of Yorkshire'') The title passed through the hands of various nobles, decided upon by the current king of England.
However, Harold Godwinson was forced immediately to march his army back down to the South where William the Conqueror was landing.
By March 2004, a mere three coalpits remained open in the area.
At the second attempt, Venutius seized the kingdom, but the Romans, under general Petillius Cerialis, conquered the Brigantes in 71&nbsp;AD.
When the territory of Yorkshire began to take shape as a result of the invasion of the Danish vikings, they instituted a monarchy  based at the settlement of Jórvík, York.
Although the Roman conquest of Britain began in 43&nbsp;AD, the Brigantes remained in control of their kingdom as a client state of Rome for an extended period, reigned over by the Brigantian monarchs Cartimandua and her husband Venutius.
After the union with Scotland two members represented the county in the Parliament of Great Britain from 1707 to 1800 and of the Parliament of the United Kingdom from 1801 to 1832.
It is commonly served with roast beef and vegetables to form part of the Sunday roast but is traditionally served as a starter dish filled with onion gravy within Yorkshire.
Sheffield City Airport opened in 1997 after years of Sheffield having no airport, due to a council decision in the 1960s not to develop one because of the city's good rail links with London and the development of airports in other nearby areas.
The "shire" suffix is locally  pronounced  "shuh", or occasionally , a homophone of "sheer".
It later became part of York Unitary Authority.
Moor House - Upper Teesdale, most of which is part of the former North Riding of Yorkshire, is one of England's largest national nature reserves.
The Wessex Kings of England were reputed to have respected the Norse customs in Yorkshire and left law-making in the hands of the local aristocracy.
The last man to hold the title was William le Gros, however the earldom was abolished by Henry II as a result of a troubled period known as ''The Anarchy''.
Representing the Kingdom of England led by Archbishop Thurstan of York, soldiers from Yorkshire defeated the more numerous Scots.
In 2014, two other former members of the Campaign for Yorkshire, Stewart Arnold and Richard Carter, founded Yorkshire First, a political party campaigning for the creation of a Yorkshire parliament by 2050 based on the Scottish Parliament.
Other foods associated with the county include: Yorkshire curd tart, a curd tart recipe with rosewater; Parkin, a sweet ginger cake which is different from standard ginger cakes in that it includes oatmeal and treacle; and Wensleydale cheese, a cheese made with milk from Wensleydale and often eaten as an accompaniment to sweet foods.
Yorkshire has sometimes been nicknamed "God's Own County" or "God's Own Country".
Leeds United are arguably the biggest team in Yorkshire, reaching the semi finals of the UEFA Champions League in 2001 and having a period of dominance in the 1970s; this position is often paralleled with Sheffield Wednesday who have had similar spells of dominance, most recently in the early 1990s, and also house a comparably large fan-base and prestigious history.
Founded by the Dane Halfdan Ragnarsson in 875, ruled for the great part by Danish kings, and populated by the families and subsequent descendants of Danish Vikings, the leadership of the kingdom nonetheless passed into Norwegian hands during its twilight years.
''The Full Monty'',  a comedy film set in Sheffield, won an Academy Award and was voted the second best British film of all time by ANI.
Within the borders of the historic county of Yorkshire are areas which are widely considered to be among the greenest in England, due to the vast stretches of unspoilt countryside in the Yorkshire Dales and North York Moors and to the open aspect of some of the major cities.
Yorkshire and the Humber is a constituency for European elections, returning six MEPs to the European Parliament.
There are several dishes which originated in Yorkshire or are heavily associated with it.
Religious architecture includes extant cathedrals as well as the ruins of monasteries and abbeys.
Orderic Vitalis put the estimation at "more than 100,000" people from the North died from hunger.
Other parts of the historic county of Yorkshire are also in other official regions.
James Herriot, the best selling author of over 60 million copies of books about his experiences of some 50 years as a veterinarian in Thirsk, North Yorkshire, the town which he refers to as Darrowby in his books (although born in Sunderland), has been admired for his easy reading style and interesting characters.
One such person was a York woman named Margaret Clitherow who was later canonised.
Small areas in the west of the historic county now form part of North West England, following boundary changes in 1974.
In the field of classical music, Yorkshire has produced some major and minor composers, including Frederick Delius, George Dyson, Edward Bairstow, William Baines, Kenneth Leighton, Eric Fenby, Haydn Wood, Arthur Wood, Arnold Cooke, Gavin Bryars, and in the area of TV, film and radio music, John Barry and Wally Stott.
Among Yorkshire's traditions is the Long Sword dance.
In 2014 the County hosted the Grande Depart of the Tour de France.
The Rhubarb Triangle is a location within Yorkshire which supplies most of the rhubarb to locals.
Ewing argued that it was offensive to Scots to argue that an English region had the same status as an 'ancient nation' such as Scotland.
The newly opened airport never managed to compete with larger airports such as Leeds Bradford International Airport and East Midlands Airport and attracted only a few scheduled flights, while the runway was too short to support low cost carriers.
There are many famous curry empires with their origins in Yorkshire including the 850-seater Aakash restaurant in Cleckheaton which has been described as "the world's largest curry house".
These include; Morrisons (Bradford), Asda (Leeds), Jet2.com (Leeds), Ronseal (Sheffield), Optare (Leeds), Aunt Bessie's (Hull), Birds Eye (Hull),  Wharfedale (Leeds), Plaxton (Scarborough), Seven Seas (Hull), Little Chef (Sheffield), Fenner plc (Hull), Halifax Bank (Halifax), Rank Organisation (Hull), Yorkshire Bank (Leeds), William Jackson Food Group (Hull), Yorkshire Building Society (Bradford), Victoria Plumb (Hull), Ebuyer (Howden), GHD (Leeds), Marks and Spencer (Leeds), Burtons (Leeds), Jaeger Ilkley, Magnet Kitchens (Keighley), Reckitt and Sons (Hull), McCains (Scarborough), First Direct (Leeds), KCOM Group (Hull),  Tetley's Brewery (Leeds), Timothy Taylor Brewery (Keighley), Bradford and Bingley (Bingley), Skipton Building Society (Skipton), Bettys and Taylors of Harrogate and Provident Financial (Bradford.)
This rivalry between the royal houses of York and Lancaster has passed into popular culture as a rivalry between the counties of Yorkshire and Lancashire, particularly in sport (for example the Roses Match played in County Cricket), although the House of Lancaster was based in York and the House of York in London.
Since that time the title has passed through the hands of many, being merged with the crown and then recreated several times.
Leeds is one of the UK's larger financial centres.
The most esteemed literary family from the county are the three Brontë sisters, with part of the county around Haworth being nicknamed Brontë Country in their honour.
The City of Leeds is Yorkshire's largest city and is the main centre of trade and commerce.
Huddersfield were the first club to win three consecutive league titles.
In more recent years, in 1998 the Campaign for Yorkshire was established to push for the creation of a Yorkshire regional assembly, sometimes dubbed the Yorkshire Parliament.
There are numerous other Grade I listed buildings within the historic county including public buildings such as Leeds Town Hall, Sheffield Town Hall, Ormesby Hall, the Yorkshire Museum and Guildhall at York, and the Piece Hall in Halifax.
Combined with the suggested ethnic difference to the rest of England, Read quoted Frederic Pearson, who wrote:
Jagger claimed in 1999 that Yorkshire had as much right to a regional parliament or assembly as Scotland and Wales because Yorkshire 'has as clear a sense of identity as Scotland or Wales.'
Several Yorkshire railway networks were introduced as railways spread across the country to reach remote areas.
Yorkshire is now divided between different official regions.
The county has also produced a set of Yorkshire colloquialisms, which are in use in the county.
The people of the North rebelled against the Normans in September 1069&nbsp;AD, enlisting Sweyn II of Denmark.
In its defining statement, the Campaign for Yorkshire made reference to the historical notions that Yorkshire had a distinctive identity:
Some Catholics in Yorkshire continued to practise their religion and those caught were executed during the reign of Elizabeth I.
Paraskos also founded a Yorkshire Studies degree course at Hull University.
Much of the modern-day symbolism of Yorkshire, such as the White Rose of York, is derived from the Yorkists, giving the house a special affinity within the culture of Yorkshire.
Tostig and Hardrada were both killed and their army was defeated decisively.
During the two years before the death of Emperor Septimius Severus, the Roman Empire was run from Eboracum by him.
Castle Howard and the Earl of Harewood's residence, Harewood House, are included amongst the Treasure Houses of England, a group of nine English stately homes.
With the Representation of the People Act 1918 there was some reshuffling on a local level for the 1918 general election, revised again during the 1950s.
An army of Danish Vikings, the Great Heathen Army as its enemies often referred to it, invaded Northumbrian territory in 866&nbsp;AD.
Spurn Point, Flamborough Head and the coastal North York Moors are designated Heritage Coast areas, and are noted for their scenic views with rugged cliffs such as the jet cliffs at Whitby, the limestone cliffs at Filey and the chalk cliffs at Flamborough Head.
Another emperor, Constantius Chlorus, died in Yorkshire during a visit in 306&nbsp;AD.
Another traditional Yorkshire food is pikelets which are similar to crumpets but much thinner.
The reign of the Viking kings came to an end with the last king Eric Bloodaxe dying in battle in 954 after the invasion and conquest by the Kingdom of England from the south.
The tribe controlled most of Northern England and more territory than any other Celtic tribe in England.
Six of the nine Brigantian ''poleis'' described by Claudius Ptolemaeus in the ''Geographia'' fall within the historic county.
He then became King Henry VII and married Elizabeth of York, daughter of Yorkist Edward IV, ending the wars.
The top league is the Super League and the most decorated Yorkshire clubs are Huddersfield Giants, Hull FC, Bradford Bulls, Hull KR, Wakefield Trinity Wildcats, Castleford Tigers and Leeds Rhinos.
Although the first Professor of English Literature at Leeds University, F.W.
His brother Tostig and Harold Hardrada, King of Norway, attempted a takeover in the north, having won the Battle of Fulford.
Further north and east the River Derwent rises on the North York Moors, flows south then westwards through the Vale of Pickering then turns south again to drain the eastern part of the Vale of York.
Three years later, the only remaining coal pit in the region was Maltby Colliery near Rotherham.
Although some government officials and Prince Charles have asserted such reform is not meant to alter the ancient boundaries or cultural loyalties, there are pressure groups such as the Yorkshire Ridings Society who want greater recognition for the historic boundaries.
Nowadays, the parsonage which was their former home is now a museum in their honour.
Before the advent of rail transport, the seaports of Hull and Whitby played an important role in transporting goods.
Bram Stoker authored ''Dracula'' while living in Whitby and it includes several elements of local folklore including the beaching of the Russian ship ''Dmitri'', which became the basis of Demeter in the book.
Yorkshire Day, held on 1 August, is a celebration of the general culture of Yorkshire, ranging from its history to its own dialect.
County councils were created for the three ridings in 1889, but their area of control did not include the large towns, which became county boroughs, and included an increasing large part of the population.
The M62 motorway crosses the county from east to west from Hull towards Greater Manchester and Merseyside.
During the winter that followed, families starved to death and thousands of peasants died of cold and hunger.
The novelist tradition in Yorkshire continued into the 20th century, with authors such as J.
Noted players from Yorkshire who have influenced the game include World Cup-winning goalkeeper Gordon Banks and two time European Footballer of the Year award winner Kevin Keegan, as well as prominent managers Herbert Chapman, Brian Clough, Bill Nicholson, George Raynor and Don Revie.
Of towns founded before the conquest, only Bridlington, Pocklington, and York continued at a prominent level.
Yorkshire or the County of York was so named as it is the Shire (administrative area or county) of the city of York  or York's Shire.
Coal mining was prolific in the south of the county during the 19th century and for most of the 20th century, particularly around Barnsley and Wakefield.
In Yorkshire there is a very close relationship between the major topographical areas and the geological period in which they were formed.
The term 'riding' is of Viking origin and derives from ''Threthingr'' meaning a third part.
Pulp from Sheffield had a massive hit in "Common People" during 1995; the song focuses on working-class northern life.
Kingston upon Hull is Yorkshire's largest port and has a large manufacturing base, its fishing industry has however declined somewhat in recent years.
Like other counties, there were also some county boroughs within Yorkshire, the oldest of which was the City of York, which had existed since the ancient Montfort's Parliament of 1265.
North Yorkshire has an established tourist industry with two national parks (Yorkshire Dales National Park, North York Moors National Park), Harrogate, York and Scarborough and such an industry is growing in Leeds.
In the 1970s there were major reforms of local government throughout the United Kingdom.
A number of athletes from or associated with Yorkshire took part in the 2012 Summer Olympics as members of Team GB; the ''Yorkshire Post'' stated that Yorkshire's athletes alone secured more gold medals than those of Spain.
The Yorkshire and the Humber region of government office covers most, but not all of the historic county.
England's oldest horse race, which began in 1519, is run each year at Kiplingcotes near Market Weighton.
To the east of the Yorkshire Wolds the River Hull flows southwards to join the Humber Estuary at Kingston upon Hull.
Historically, Yorkshire was divided into three ridings and the Ainsty of York.
Yorkshire is officially recognised by FIFA as the birthplace of club football, as Sheffield FC founded in 1857 are certified as the oldest association football club in the world.
The countryside of Yorkshire has acquired the common nickname of "God's Own County".
Jórvík was the last of the independent kingdoms to be taken to form part of the Kingdom of England and thus the local monarchal title became defunct.
The Danes conquered and assumed what is now York and renamed it Jórvík, making it the capital city of a new Danish kingdom under the same name.
The M1 carries traffic from London and the south of England to Yorkshire.
Among the most celebrated novels written by the sisters are Anne Brontë's ''The Tenant of Wildfell Hall'', Charlotte Brontë's ''Jane Eyre'' and Emily Brontë's ''Wuthering Heights''.
Some of the battles took place in Yorkshire, such as those at Wakefield and Towton, the latter of which is known as the bloodiest battle ever fought on English soil.
This was later renamed the Yorkshire Party.
In the following century the spa towns of Harrogate and Scarborough flourished, due to people believing mineral water had curative properties.
Yorkshire pudding is the base for toad in the hole, a dish containing sausage.
Later medieval castles at Helmsley, Middleham and Scarborough were built as a means of defence against the invading Scots.
The emblem of Yorkshire is the White Rose of the English royal House of York, and the most commonly used flag representative of Yorkshire is the White Rose on a blue background, which after nearly fifty years of use, was recognised by the Flag Institute on 29 July 2008.
In the area of boxing "Prince" Naseem Hamed from Sheffield achieved title success and widespread fame, in what the BBC describes as "one of British boxing's most illustrious careers".
The Black Death reached Yorkshire by 1349, killing around a third of the population.
"Shire" is from Old English, scir meaning care or official charge.
The population of Yorkshire boomed until hit by the Great Famine in the years between 1315 and 1322.
Yorkshire also has air transport services from Leeds Bradford International Airport.
Many large British companies are based in Yorkshire or were founded there.
Several noted films are set in Yorkshire, including ''Kes'', ''This Sporting Life'', ''Room at the Top'', ''Brassed Off'', ''Mischief Night'', ''Rita, Sue and Bob Too'' and ''Calendar Girls''.
The King of England marched North where the two armies met at the Battle of Stamford Bridge.
This resulted in an anonymous pamphlet being published in London in 1799 arguing at length that Yorkshire could never be an independent state as it would always be reliant on the rest of the United Kingdom to provide it with essential resources.
What followed was the Harrying of the North ordered by William.
Yorkshire people have their own Yorkshire dialects and accents and are, or rather were, known as ''Tykes''.
Yorkshire County Cricket Club represents the historic county in the domestic first class cricket County Championship; with a total of 31 championship titles, 13 more than any other county, Yorkshire is the most decorated county cricket club.
One of those brought into the Campaign for Yorkshire by Jane Thomas was Herbert Read scholar Michael Paraskos, who organised a series of events in 2000 to highlight the distinctiveness of Yorkshire culture.
Yorkshire has a flourishing folk music culture, with over forty folk clubs and thirty annual folk music festivals.
The western Pennines are served by the River Ribble which drains westwards into the Irish Sea close to Lytham St Annes.
In 2007 the Yorkshire Garland Group was formed to make Yorkshire folk songs accessible online and in schools.
In the far north of the county the River Tees flows eastwards through Teesdale and empties its waters into the North Sea downstream of Middlesbrough.
Near Great Ouseburn the Ure is joined by the small Ouse Gill Beck, and below the confluence the river is known as the Ouse.
Though the monarchal title became defunct, it was succeeded by the creation of the Earl of York title of nobility by king of England Edgar the Peaceful in 960.
This saw his son Constantine the Great proclaimed emperor in the city, who would become renowned due to his contributions to Christianity.
Sheffield once had heavy industries, such as coal mining and the steel industry.
Continuing this tradition in the field of horse racing, there are currently nine established racecourses in the county.
The Royal Society for the Protection of Birds runs nature reserves such as the one at Bempton Cliffs with coastal wildlife such as the northern gannet, Atlantic puffin and razorbill.
However, while Sheffield's heavy industry has declined, the region has reinvented itself as a centre for specialist engineering.
Poets include Ted Hughes, W. H. Auden, William Empson, Simon Armitage and Andrew Marvell.
B. Priestley, Alan Bennett, Stan Barstow, Dame Margaret Drabble, A S Byatt, and Barbara Taylor Bradford being prominent examples.
A cluster of hi-tech facilities including The Welding Institute and the Boeing partnered Advanced Materials Research Centre have all helped to raise the region's profile and to bring significant investment into Yorkshire.
The River Wharfe, which drains Wharfedale, joins the Ouse upstream of Cawood.
Most current Yorkshire breweries date from the Industrial Revolution of the late 18th and early 19th century.
Spectator crowds over the two days were estimated to be of the order of 2.5 million people.
However, when Yorkshire formed the southern part of the kingdom of Northumbria  there were several notable poets, scholars and ecclesiastics, including Alcuin, Cædmon and Wilfrid.
During the Second World War, Yorkshire became an important base for RAF Bomber Command and brought the county into the cutting edge of the war.
With slightly different borders, the government office entity which currently contains most of Yorkshire is the Yorkshire and the Humber region of England.
This region includes a northern slice of Lincolnshire, but does not include the northern part of the ceremonial county of North Yorkshire (Middlesbrough and Redcar and Cleveland), which is in the North East England region.
Yorkshire is drained by several rivers.
Under the act, the Ridings lost their lieutenancies, shrievalties, and administrative counties.
In the 16th and 17th centuries Leeds and other wool industry centred towns continued to grow, along with Huddersfield, Hull and Sheffield, while coal mining first came into prominence in the West Riding of Yorkshire.
In addition to this there are properties which are conserved and managed by the National Trust, such as Nunnington Hall, the Rievaulx Terrace & Temples and Studley Royal Park.
That they had the Yorkshire area as their heartland is evident in that ''Isurium Brigantum'' (now known as Aldborough) was the capital town of their ''civitas'' under Roman rule.
In 1999 about  was added to make it swing east of Leeds and connect to the A1.
The 1982 Eurovision Song Contest was held in the Harrogate International Centre.
Famous folk performers from the county include the Watersons from Hull, who began recording Yorkshire versions of folk songs from 1965; Heather Wood (born 1945) of the Young Tradition; the short-lived electric folk group Mr Fox (1970–72), The Deighton Family; Julie Matthews; Kathryn Roberts; and Kate Rusby.
At its greatest extent, Northumbria stretched from the Irish Sea to the North Sea and from Edinburgh down to Hallamshire in South Yorkshire.
During the premiership of William Pitt the Younger the hypothetical idea of Yorkshire becoming independent was raised in the British parliament in relation to the question whether Ireland should become part of the United Kingdom.
Throughout these changes, Yorkshire has continued to be recognised as a geographical territory and cultural region.
During the 1970s David Bowie, himself of a father from Tadcaster in North Yorkshire, hired three musicians from Hull, Mick Ronson, Trevor Bolder and Mick Woodmansey; together they recorded ''Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars'', an album considered by a magazine article as one of a 100 greatest and most influential of all time.
The western  part of the historic North Riding had an additional infusion of Breton culture due to the Honour of Richmond being occupied by Alain Le Roux, grandson of Geoffrey I, Duke of Brittany.
For the 1865 general elections and onwards, the West Riding was further divided into Northern, Eastern and Southern parliamentary constituencies, though these only lasted until the major Redistribution of Seats Act 1885.
From 1290, Yorkshire was represented by two Members of Parliament of the House of Commons of the Parliament of England.
Taylor Bradford  is noted for ''A Woman of Substance'' which was one of the top-ten best selling novels in history.
As a consequence, he claimed, it is possible the first work of English literature, ''Beowulf'', believed to have been composed by Geats, was written in Yorkshire, and this distinctive ethnic and cultural origin is the root of the unique status of Yorkshire today.
