The longest glacier in the Yosemite area ran down the Grand Canyon of the Tuolumne River for , passing well beyond Hetch Hetchy Valley.
Muir also helped persuade local officials to virtually eliminate grazing from the Yosemite high country.
Climate change has reduced the number and size of glaciers around the world.
However, bicycles are only allowed off-road on  of paved trails in Yosemite Valley itself; mountain biking is not allowed.
This was part of the Sevier orogeny.
The first phase of regional plutonism started 210 million years ago in the late Triassic and continued throughout the Jurassic to about 150 million years before present (BP).
Classes are offered by numerous groups on rock climbing.
More recently, preservationists persuaded Congress to designate , or about 89% of the park, as the Yosemite Wilderness—a highly protected wilderness area.
Most park visitors stay just for the day, and only visit locations within Yosemite Valley that are easily accessible by automobile.
Desmond changed its name to the Yosemite National Park Company in December 1917 and was reorganized in 1920.
Accounts from this battalion were the first well-documented reports of ethnic Europeans entering Yosemite Valley.
There are an average of 39.5 days with highs of  or higher and an average of 97.9 nights with freezing temperatures.
In addition, bicyclists can ride on regular roads.
Downhill skiing is available at the Badger Pass Ski Area—the oldest downhill skiing area in California, offering downhill skiing from mid-December through early April.
Designated a World Heritage Site in 1984, Yosemite is internationally recognized for its granite cliffs, waterfalls, clear streams, giant sequoia groves, lakes, mountains, glaciers, and biological diversity.
This rim fire was the third largest on record, and burned nearly 500 acres of wild habitat.
Eventually, all the buses in Yosemite will be electric.
Heat generated from the Farallon Plate subducting below the North American Plate led to the creation of an island arc of volcanoes on the west coast of proto-North America between the late Devonian and Permian periods.
Along much of Yosemite's western boundary, habitats are dominated by mixed coniferous forests of ponderosa pine, sugar pine, incense cedar, white fir, Douglas fir, and a few stands of giant sequoia, interspersed by areas of black oak and canyon live oak.
Bicycle rentals are available in Yosemite Valley spring through fall.
The black bears of Yosemite were once famous for breaking into parked cars to steal food.
There is a US$25-30 per automobile user fee to enter the park, depending on the season.
Lyell Glacier is the largest glacier in Yosemite (the Palisades Glaciers are the largest in the Sierra Nevada) and covers .
Only the highest peaks, such as Mount Dana and Mount Conness, were not covered by glaciers.
About 4 million people visit Yosemite each year: most spend the majority of their time in the seven square miles (18&nbsp;km2) of Yosemite Valley.
Retreating glaciers often left recessional moraines that impounded lakes such as the  long Lake Yosemite (a shallow lake that periodically covered much of the floor of Yosemite Valley).
On that trip, Muir convinced Roosevelt to take control of Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Grove away from California and return it to the federal government.
Spacing between joints is controlled by the amount of silica in the granite and granodiorite rocks; more silica tends to create a more resistant rock, resulting in larger spaces between joints and fractures.
A relatively high diversity of wildlife species is supported by these habitats, because of relatively mild, lower-elevation climate and the mixture of habitat types and plant species.
The Curry Company and its rival, the Yosemite National Park Company, were forced to merge in 1925 to form the Yosemite Park & Curry Company (YP&CC).
Glacial systems reached depths of up to  and left their marks in the Yosemite area.
These non-native plants were introduced into Yosemite following the migration of early Euro-American settlers in the late 1850s.
Subsequent tilting of the Sierra block and the resulting accelerated uplift of the Sierra Nevada increased the gradient of western-flowing streams.
The climate in these habitats is harsh and the growing season is short, but species such as pika, yellow-bellied marmot, white-tailed jackrabbit, Clark's nutcracker, and black rosy finch are adapted to these conditions.
A number of these species aggressively invade and displace the native plant communities, resulting in impacts on the park's resources.
Three stagecoach roads were built in the mid-1870s to provide better access for the growing number of visitors to Yosemite Valley.
The Wawona Tree, also known as the Tunnel Tree, was a famous giant sequoia that stood in the Mariposa Grove.
The  park is roughly the size of the U.S. state of Rhode Island and contains thousands of lakes and ponds,  of streams,  of hiking trails, and  of roads.
Everything from horse-drawn carriages in the late 19th century, to automobiles in the first part of the 20th century, traveled the road which passed through that tree.
Two federally designated Wild and Scenic Rivers, the Merced and the Tuolumne, begin within Yosemite's borders and flow westward through the Sierra foothills, into the Central Valley of California.
Of California's 7,000 plant species, about 50% occur in the Sierra Nevada and more than 20% within Yosemite.
All glaciers in the park are relatively small glaciers that occupy areas that are in almost permanent shade, such as north- and northeast-facing cirques.
They stole horses from their hosts and moved away, but the Mono Paiutes tracked down and killed many of the Ahwahneechee, including Chief Tenaya.
The most snow in one month was  in January 1993.
Yosemite is one of the largest and least fragmented habitat blocks in the Sierra Nevada, and the park supports a diversity of plants and animals.
Because of orographic lift, precipitation increases with elevation up to  where it slowly decreases to the crest.
The name "Yosemite" (meaning "killer" in Miwok) originally referred to the name of a renegade tribe which was driven out of the area (and possibly annihilated) by the Mariposa Battalion.
Clark and the reigning commissioners were ousted in 1880, this dispute also reaching the Supreme Court in 1880.
Merced Glacier flowed out of Yosemite Valley and into the Merced River Gorge.
Rock climbing is an important part of Yosemite.
In the late 1920s, in an attempt that would be impossible to make today, a bid for Yosemite for the 1932 Winter Olympics was put forward.
The Mono Paiute took the survivors as captives back to Mono Lake and absorbed them into the Mono Lake Paiute tribe.
Chief Tenaya and his Ahwahneechee were eventually captured and their village burned; they were removed to a reservation near Fresno, California.
Muir convinced prominent guests of the importance of putting the area under federal protection; one such guest was Robert Underwood Johnson, editor of ''Century Magazine''.
The park has an elevation range from  and contains five major vegetation zones: chaparral/oak woodland, lower montane forest, upper montane forest, subalpine zone, and alpine.
Average annual precipitation is nearly , falling on 65 days.
Muir and the Sierra Club opposed the project, while others, including Gifford Pinchot, supported it.
The issue was not settled until 1872 when the homesteader land holdings were invalidated by the U.S. Supreme Court.
Almost 95% of the park is designated wilderness.
They are related to the Northern Paiute and Mono tribes.
Rafting can be done through the Yosemite Valley on the Merced River.
This trip persuaded Roosevelt to return "Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Grove to federal protection as part of Yosemite National Park".
These rocks have since been metamorphosed.
This was directly part of the creation of the Sierra Nevada Batholith, and the resulting rocks were mostly granitic in composition and emplaced about  below the surface.
The Miwok, a neighboring tribe, and most white settlers considered the Ahwahneechee to be especially violent because of their frequent territorial disputes.
Most of these long, linear and very deep cracks trend northeast or northwest and form parallel, often regularly spaced sets.
The most serious current threats to Yosemite's wildlife and the ecosystems they occupy include loss of a natural fire regime, exotic species, air pollution, habitat fragmentation, and climate change.
By the late 1890s, sheep grazing was no longer a problem, and the Army made many other improvements.
The company built the Ahwahnee Hotel in 1927.
Between 1929 and 1973, the show was organized by Ansel Adams.
It bought out or built hotels, stores, camps, a dairy, a garage, and other park services.
On a more local basis, factors such as road kills and the availability of human food have affected some wildlife species.
Numerous sheer drops, glacial steps and hanging valleys in the park provide many places for waterfalls to exist, especially during April, May, and June (the snowmelt season).
At a variety of elevations, meadows provide important, productive habitat for wildlife.
Hundreds of ephemeral waterfalls also exist in the park.
Animals come to feed on the green grasses and use the flowing and standing water found in many meadows.
Yosemite was central to the development of the national park idea.
The California Gold Rush in the mid-19th century dramatically increased travel by European-Americans in the area, causing competition for resources between the regional Paiute and Miwok and the miners and hangers on.
Much of the park is open to cross-country skiing and snowshoeing, with several backcountry ski huts open for use.
Between late spring and early fall, much of the park can be accessed for multiple-day backpacking trips.
Tuolumne Meadows Lodge, Tioga Pass Road, and campgrounds at Tenaya and Merced lakes were also completed in 1916.
They were also an encouraged tourist sight for many years at the park's garbage dumps, where bears congregated to eat park visitors' garbage and tourists gathered to photograph the bears.
Bunnell is credited with naming Yosemite Valley, based on his interviews with Chief Tenaya.
Sediment was derived from continental sources and was deposited in shallow water.
Lee Vining Glacier carved Lee Vining Canyon and emptied into Lake Russel (the much-enlarged ice age version of Mono Lake).
Tuolumne and Merced River systems originate along the crest of the Sierra Nevada in the park and have carved river canyons  deep.
Muir was one of the first to theorize that the major landforms in Yosemite Valley were created by large alpine glaciers, bucking established scientists such as Josiah Whitney, who regarded Muir as an amateur.
Many non-native species, such as yellow star thistle (''Centaurea solstitialis''), are able to produce a long tap root that allows them to out-compete the native plants for available water.
The streams consequently ran faster and thus cut their valleys more quickly.
Also, the treeless alpine habitats are the areas favored by Sierra Nevada bighorn sheep.
The Sierra crest and the Pacific Crest Trail run through Yosemite, with peaks of red metamorphic rock, such as Mount Dana and Mount Gibbs, and granite peaks, such as Mount Conness.
The Yosemite Museum was founded in 1926 through the efforts of Ansel Franklin Hall.
Later volcanism in the Jurassic intruded and covered these rocks in what may have been magmatic activity associated with the early stages of the creation of the Sierra Nevada Batholith.
From 1899 to 1913, cavalry regiments of the Western Department, including the all Black 9th Cavalry (known as the "Buffalo Soldiers") and the 1st Cavalry, stationed two troops at Yosemite and brought with them the trooper's campaign hat with its distinctive Montana Peak we recognize today as the "ranger hat."
This species, however, is now found in the Yosemite area only around Tioga Pass, where a small, reintroduced population exists.
Starting 20 million years ago (in the Cenozoic) and lasting until 5 million years ago, a now-extinct extension of Cascade Range volcanoes erupted, bringing large amounts of igneous material in the area.
The single most erosive force over the last few million years has been large alpine glaciers, which have turned the previously V-shaped river-cut valleys into U-shaped glacial-cut canyons (such as Yosemite Valley and Hetch Hetchy Valley).
He was pursuing forces of around 200 Ahwahneechee led by Chief Tenaya.
Despite the richness of high-quality habitats in Yosemite, the brown bear, California condor, and least Bell's vireo have become extinct in the park within historical time, and another 37 species currently have special status under either California or federal endangered species legislation.
Volcanic activity persisted past 5 million years BP east of the current park borders in the Mono Lake and Long Valley areas.
Yosemite has a Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification ''Csa''), meaning most precipitation falls during the mild winter, and the other seasons are nearly dry (less than 3% of precipitation falls during the long, hot summers).
These igneous deposits blanketed the region north of the Yosemite region.
Wildlife species typically found in these habitats include black bear, coyote, raccoon, mountain kingsnake, Gilbert's skink, white-headed woodpecker, bobcat, river otter, gray fox, red fox, brown creeper, two species of skunk, cougar, spotted owl, and a wide variety of bat species.
Meadow habitats, distributed at elevations from  in the park, are generally wetlands, as are the riparian habitats found on the banks of Yosemite's numerous streams and rivers.
The buses are quiet and do not emit pollutants.
As revealed by archeological finds, the Yosemite Valley has been inhabited for nearly 3,000 years, though humans may have first visited the area as long as 8,000 to 10,000 years ago.
Driving locations also allow guests to observe the night sky in locations other than their campsite or lodge.
), Himalayan blackberry (''Rubus armeniacus''), cut-leaved blackberry (''Rubus laciniatus'') and large periwinkle (''Vinca major'').
Many people enjoy short walks and longer hikes to waterfalls in Yosemite Valley, or walks among giant sequoias in the Mariposa, Tuolumne, or Merced Groves.
In 1855, entrepreneur James Mason Hutchings, artist Thomas Ayres and two others were the first to tour the area.
A park bill was prepared with the assistance of the General Land Office in the Interior Department.
John Muir wrote articles popularizing the area and increasing scientific interest in it.
Administrators in the National Park Service felt that limiting the number of concessionaires in each national park would be more financially sound.
The chief and some others were later allowed to return to Yosemite Valley.
The snowiest year was 1967 with .
Species that are highly dependent upon meadow habitat include great grey owl, willow flycatcher, Yosemite toad, and mountain beaver.
Settler Galen Clark discovered the Mariposa Grove of giant sequoia in Wawona in 1857.
It was estimated to have been 2,300 years old.
The high country of Yosemite contains beautiful areas such as Tuolumne Meadows, Dana Meadows, the Clark Range, the Cathedral Range, and the Kuna Crest.
These fires are detrimental to the ecology of the park, and also damage the income generated by tourism.
Yosemite Valley represents only one percent of the park area, but this is where most visitors arrive and stay.
Camp 4 was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2003.
Later, John Muir led a successful movement to establish a larger national park encompassing not just the valley, but surrounding mountains and forests as well—paving the way for the United States national park system.
At the park headquarters, with an elevation of , January averages , while July averages , though in summer the nights are much cooler than the hot days.
Pillars and columns, such as Washington Column and Lost Arrow, are created by cross joints.
The park can be divided into 5 sections for the day-user—Yosemite Valley, Wawona/Mariposa Grove/Glacier Point, Tuolumne Meadows, Hetch Hetchy, and Crane Flat/White Wolf.
Instead, they were formed during one of the neoglacial episodes that have occurred since the thawing of the Ice Age (such as the Little Ice Age).
The cavalry could not intervene to ease the worsening condition of Yosemite Valley and Mariposa Grove.
Because bears who show aggression towards people usually are eventually destroyed, park personnel have continued to come up with innovative ways to have bears associate humans and their property with unpleasant experiences, such as being hit with rubber bullets.
With its scrubby sun-baked chaparral, stately groves of pine, fir, and sequoia, and expanses of alpine woodlands and meadows, Yosemite National Park preserves a Sierra Nevada landscape as it prevailed before Euro-American settlement.
The newly created national park came under the jurisdiction of the United States Army's Troop I of the 4th Cavalry on May 19, 1891, which set up camp in Wawona with Captain Abram Epperson Wood as acting superintendent.
At elevations above , the hot, dry summer temperatures are moderated by frequent summer thunderstorms, along with snow that can persist into July.
Increasing encounters between bears and humans and increasing damage to property led to an aggressive campaign to discourage bears from relying on human food or interacting with people and their property.
In 1906, Roosevelt signed a bill that did precisely that.
Galen Clark was appointed by the commission as the Grant's first guardian, but neither Clark nor the commissioners had the authority to evict homesteaders (which included Hutchings).
Hutchings and Ayres were responsible for much of the earliest publicity about Yosemite, writing articles and special magazine issues about the Valley.
There are also swimming pools available at Yosemite Lodge and Curry Village.
The interface between meadow and forest is also favored by many animal species because of the proximity of open areas for foraging and cover for protection.
At least four major glaciations have occurred in the Sierra Nevada, locally called the Sherwin (also called the pre-Tahoe), Tahoe, Tenaya, and Tioga.
Wilderness permits are required for backcountry overnight ski trips.
Mount Lyell is the highest point in the park, standing at .
The National Park Service was formed in 1916, and Yosemite was transferred to that agency's jurisdiction.
Traffic congestion in the valley is a serious problem during peak season, in summer.
'''Yosemite National Park''' ( ) is a United States National Park spanning eastern portions of Tuolumne, Mariposa and Madera counties in the central eastern portion of the U.S. state of California.
Going higher in elevation, the coniferous forests become purer stands of red fir, western white pine, Jeffrey pine, lodgepole pine, and the occasional foxtail pine.
The Sherwin glaciers were the largest, filling Yosemite and other valleys, while later stages produced much smaller glaciers.
Natural and human-caused disturbances, such as wildland fires and construction activities, have contributed to a rapid increase in the spread of non-native plants.
Erosion acting on master joints is responsible for creating valleys and later canyons.
Reptiles are not common, but include rubber boa, western fence lizard, and northern alligator lizard.
Helmets are required by law for children under 18 years of age.
Many Yosemite glaciers, including Merced Glacier, which was discovered by John Muir in 1871 and bolstered his glacial origins theory of the Yosemite area, have disappeared and most of the others have lost up to 75% of their surface area.
Precipitation amounts vary from  at  elevation to  at .
Hydrologic processes, including glaciation, flooding, and fluvial geomorphic response, have been fundamental in creating landforms in the park.
The Park Service has reduced artificial inducements to visit the park, such as the ''Firefall'', in which red-hot embers were pushed off a cliff near Glacier Point at night.
The wettest year was 1983 with  and the driest year was 1976 with .
Some non-native species may cause an increase in the fire frequency of an area or increase the available nitrogen in the soil that may allow more non-native plants to become established.
The geology of the Yosemite area is characterized by granitic rocks and remnants of older rock.
While some locations in Yosemite require hiking, other locations can be reached via automobile transportation.
This species grows larger in volume than any other and is one of the tallest and longest-lived.
Species likely to be found include golden-mantled ground squirrel, chickaree, fisher, Steller's jay, hermit thrush, and northern goshawk.
Correspondence and articles written by members of the battalion helped to popularize the natural wonders of the Yosemite Valley and the surrounding area.
The most recent fire, the Rim Fire, which destroyed nearly $2 billion in assets and revenue, closed off much of the park to tourists.
Near Mono Lake, they took refuge with the nearby Mono tribe of Paiute.
Before then the area was called "Ahwahnee" ("big mouth") by indigenous people.
None of the Yosemite glaciers are a remnant of the much, much larger Ice Age alpine glaciers responsible for sculpting the Yosemite landscape.
The current policy of setting prescribed fires is expected to help the germination issue.
Additional species that have been recognized more recently as aggressive and requiring control are yellow star thistle (''Centaurea solstitialis''), sweet clover (''Melilot'' spp.
Many tribes visited the area to trade, including nearby Central Sierra Miwoks, who lived along the drainage area of the Tuolumne and Stanislaus Rivers.
Hutchings became the new park guardian.
Numerous vertical joint planes controlled where and how fast erosion took place.
First, Galen Clark and others lobbied to protect Yosemite Valley from development, ultimately leading to President Abraham Lincoln's signing the Yosemite Grant in 1864.
Uplift of the Sierra accelerated again about two million years ago during the Pleistocene.
The two Supreme Court decisions affecting management of the Yosemite Grant are considered important precedents in land management law.
John Muir was a Scottish-born American naturalist and explorer.
The downslope movement of the ice masses cut and sculpted the U-shaped valley that attracts so many visitors to its scenic vistas today.
Park rangers encourage visitors to experience portions of the park in addition to Yosemite Valley.
Average annual snowfall is .
Vegetation and game in the region was similar to that present today; acorns were a staple to their diet, as well as other seeds and plants, salmon and deer.
He had simple lodgings built, and roads to the area.
Bunnell wrote that Chief Tenaya was the founder of the Pai-Ute Colony of Ah-wah-nee.
In 2016, The Trust for Public Land purchased Ackerson Meadow, a 400-acre tract on the western edge of Yosemite National Park, for $2.3 million in order to preserve habitat and protect the area from development.
Ice thickness in Yosemite Valley may have reached  during the early glacial episode.
Yosemite Valley is open all year, although some roads within the park close in winter.
In addition to exploring the natural features of the park, visitors can also learn about the natural and cultural history of Yosemite Valley at a number of facilities in the valley: the Yosemite Valley Visitor Center, the adjoining Yosemite Museum, and the Nature Center at Happy Isles.
Predators, in turn, are attracted to these areas.
Granite domes such as Sentinel Dome and Half Dome rise , respectively, above the valley floor.
Overgrazing of meadows (especially by sheep), logging of giant sequoia, and other damage caused Muir to become an advocate for further protection.
Hutchings' publicity efforts between 1855 and 1860 led to an increase in tourism to Yosemite.
Taken together, the park's varied habitats support over 250 species of vertebrates, which include fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals.
Bull thistle (''Cirsium vulgare''), common mullein (''Verbascum thapsus''), and Klamath weed (''Hypericum perforatum'') have been identified as noxious pests in Yosemite since the 1940s.
The Tuolumne River drains the entire northern portion of the park, an area of approximately .
Since the cones of these trees require fire-touched soil to germinate, historic fire suppression has reduced these trees' ability to reproduce.
These include lodgepole pine, whitebark pine, and mountain hemlock that, at highest elevations, give way to vast expanses of granite as treeline is reached.
One of the most significant camping trips Muir took was in 1903 with then president Theodore Roosevelt.
A free shuttle bus system operates year-round in the valley, and park rangers encourage people to use this system since parking within the valley during the summer is often nearly impossible to find.
Muir and his Sierra Club continued to lobby the government and influential people for the creation of a unified Yosemite National Park.
Others like to drive or take a tour bus to Glacier Point (summer–fall) to see a spectacular view of Yosemite Valley and the high country, or drive along the scenic Tioga Road to Tuolumne Meadows (May–October) and go for a walk or hike.
Annual park visitation exceeds 3.5&nbsp;million, with most visitor use concentrated in the seven-square-mile (18&nbsp;km2) area of Yosemite Valley.
The area of the park was astride a passive continental margin during the Precambrian and early Paleozoic.
Landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted emphasized the importance of conservation of Yosemite Valley.
