During his short reign (1307–11), the government fell into financial difficulties, partly due to bad decisions made by Külüg.
Shi Tianze was married to two Jurchen women, a Han Chinese woman, and a Korean woman, and his son Shi Gang was born to one of his Jurchen wives.
Instability troubled the early years of Kublai Khan's reign.
He was the first Yuan emperor to actively support and adopt mainstream Chinese culture after the reign of Kublai, to the discontent of some Mongol elite.
In addition to Emperor of China, Kublai Khan also claimed the title of Great Khan, supreme over the other successor khanates: the Chagatai, the Golden Horde, and the Ilkhanate.
Physicians received official support from the Yuan government and were given special legal privileges.
Professor Liam Kelley noted that people from Song dynasty China like Zhao Zhong and Xu Zongdao fled to Tran dynasty ruled Vietnam after the Mongol invasion of the Song and they helped the Tran fight against the Mongol invasion.
The Mongols experimented with establishing the Chinese-style paper monetary system in Mongol-controlled territories outside of China.
# "Han", or all subjects of the former Jin dynasty, including Han Chinese, Khitans, Jurchens in northern China, and other peoples like Koreans,
There were many religions practiced during the Yuan dynasty, such as Buddhism, Islam, and Christianity.
Nevertheless, such a civilian bureaucracy, with the Central Secretariat as the top institution that was (directly or indirectly) responsible for most other governmental agencies (such as the traditional Chinese-style Six Ministries), was created in China.
The expeditions were hampered by disease, an inhospitable climate, and a tropical terrain unsuitable for the mounted warfare of the Mongols.
The Yuan dynasty is considered both a successor to the Mongol Empire and an imperial Chinese dynasty.
In 1351, the Red Turban Rebellion started and grew into a nationwide uprising.
The account of his travels, ''Il milione'' (or, ''The Million'', known in English as the ''Travels of Marco Polo''), appeared about the year 1299.
Chinese travelers to the West were able to provide assistance in such areas as hydraulic engineering.
Liu Heima and Shi Tianze served Ogödei Khan.
There are no explicit signs of Muslim influences in the Shoushi calendar, but Mongol rulers were known to be interested in Muslim calendars.
The mathematician Zhu Shijie (1249–1314) solved simultaneous equations with up to four unknowns using a rectangular array of coefficients, equivalent to modern matrices.
The physician Wei Yilin (1277–1347) invented a suspension method for reducing dislocated joints, which he performed using anesthetics.
The name of the dynasty originated from the ''I Ching'' and describes the "origin of the universe" or a "primal force".
Jews were also affected and forbidden by the Mongols to eat Kosher.
Kublai secured the northeast border in 1259 by installing the hostage prince Wonjong as the ruler of Korea, making it a Mongol tributary state.
One of the more notable applications of printing technology was the ''chao'', the paper money of the Yuan.
The Ming Emperor Zhu Yuanzhang (1368–97) admired the Mongols' unification of China and adopted its garrison system.
Advances in polynomial algebra were made by mathematicians during the Yuan era.
In the historiography of Mongolia, it is generally considered to be the continuation of the Mongol Empire.
Before Yesün Temür's reign, China had been relatively free from popular rebellions after the reign of Kublai.
He renewed a massive drive against the Song dynasty to the south.
They published a diverse range of works, and printed educational, literary, medical, religious, and historical texts.
The Mongols practiced debt slavery, and by 1290 in all parts of the Mongol Empire commoners were selling their children into slavery.
Internal strife threatened Kublai within his empire.
He was one of the first mathematicians in China to work on spherical trigonometry.
As Toghun Temür grew, he came to disapprove of Bayan's autocratic rule.
In 1340 he allied himself with Bayan's nephew Toqto'a, who was in discord with Bayan, and banished Bayan by coup.
The Prince of Liang, Basalawarmi established a separate pocket of resistance to the Ming in Yunnan and Guizhou, but his forces were decisively defeated by the Ming in 1381.
The Mongols and Semuren were given certain advantages in the dynasty, and this would last even after the restoration of the imperial examination in the early 14th century.
Note, however, Yuan dynasty is traditionally often extended to cover the Mongol Empire before Kublai Khan's formal establishment of the Yuan in 1271, partly because Kublai had his grandfather Genghis Khan placed on the official record as the founder of the dynasty or Taizu ().
Succession for the Yuan dynasty, however, was an intractable problem, later causing much strife and internal struggle.
The Yuan dynasty was the first time that non-native Chinese people ruled all of China.
Chinese physicians opposed Western medicine because its humoral system contradicted the yin-yang and wuxing philosophy underlying traditional Chinese medicine.
He fled north to Shangdu from Khanbaliq (present-day Beijing) in 1368 after the approach of the forces of the Míng dynasty (1368–1644), founded by Zhu Yuanzhang in the south.
The Yuan government established centers for printing throughout China.
The fourth Yuan emperor, Buyantu Khan (Ayurbarwada), was a competent emperor.
The summation of a finite arithmetic series is also covered in the book.
The southern branch still remained in Quzhou where they lived to this day.
Kublai's Chinese advisers still wielded significant power in the government, but their official rank was nebulous.
Local schools and government agencies were funded to support the publishing of books.
Kublai Khan promoted commercial, scientific, and cultural growth.
He adopted as his capital city Kaiping in Inner Mongolia, later renamed Shangdu.
Most significantly he introduced a policy called "New Deals", focused on monetary reforms.
Western musical instruments were introduced to enrich Chinese performing arts.
Kublai proclaimed Khanbaliq the "Great Capital" or Daidu (Dadu,  in Chinese) of the dynasty.
Annam, Burma, and Champa recognized Mongol hegemony and established tributary relations with the Yuan dynasty.
In the China of the Yuan, or Mongol era, various important developments in the arts occurred or continued in their development, including the areas of painting, mathematics, calligraphy, poetry, and theater, with many great artists and writers being famous today.
Many Hui Muslims claim this is because that they played an important role in overthrowing the Mongols and it was given in thanks by the Han Chinese for assisting them.
Gou derived a cubic interpolation formula for his astronomical calculations.
Foreigners from outside the Mongol Empire entirely, such as the Polo family, were everywhere welcomed.
Some suggest that Marco Polo acquired much of his knowledge through contact with Persian traders since many of the places he named were in Persian.
Eastern crops such as carrots, turnips, new varieties of lemons, eggplants, and melons, high-quality granulated sugar, and cotton were all either introduced or successfully popularized during the Yuan dynasty.
The Yuan undertook extensive public works.
In the Proclamation of the Dynastic Name (《建國號詔》), Kublai announced the name of the new dynasty as Great Yuan and claimed the succession of former Chinese dynasties from the Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors to the Tang dynasty.
Wars and construction projects had drained the Mongol treasury.
The major cultural achievements were the development of drama and the novel and the increased use of the written vernacular.
Kublai grew despondent and retreated from his duties as emperor.
The adoption of a dynastic name legitimized Mongol rule by integrating the government into the narrative of traditional Chinese political succession.
However, he was mainly a puppet of the powerful official El Temür during his latter three-year reign.
Cinggis Qa’an replied: “By the aid of heaven we have pacified you; you are our slaves.
In 1271, Kublai formally claimed the Mandate of Heaven and declared that 1272 was the first year of the Great Yuan () in the style of a traditional Chinese dynasty.
No Chinese translation of Western medical works is known, but it is possible that the Chinese had access to Avicenna's ''The Canon of Medicine''.
How can this be right?” He thereupon made them eat.
Several medical advances were made in the Yuan period.
In 1354, when Toghtogha led a large army to crush the Red Turban rebels, Toghun Temür suddenly dismissed him for fear of betrayal.
He was installed as the emperor (Emperor Wenzong) in Khanbaliq, while Yesün Temür's son Ragibagh succeeded to the throne in Shangdu with the support of Yesün Temür's favorite retainer Dawlat Shah.
Shi Tianze (Shih T'ien-tse), Zhang Rou (Chang Jou, 張柔), and Yan Shi (Yen Shih, 嚴實) and other high ranking Chinese who served in the Jin dynasty and defected to the Mongols helped build the structure for the administration of the new state.
While the existence of these central government departments and the Six Ministries (which had been introduced since the Sui and Tang dynasties) gave a Sinicized image in the Yuan administration, the actual functions of these ministries also reflected how Mongolian priorities and policies reshaped and redirected those institutions.
The occurrence of these revolts and the subsequent suppression aggravated the financial difficulties of the Yuan government.
The Mongol Emperors had built large palaces and pavilions, but some still continued to live as nomads at times.
Kublai captured the Song capital of Hangzhou in 1276, the wealthiest city of China.
Alans were recruited into the Mongol forces with one unit called "Right Alan Guard" which was combined with "recently surrendered" soldiers, Mongols, and Chinese soldiers stationed in the area of the former Kingdom of Qocho and in Besh Balikh the Mongols established a Chinese military colony led by Chinese general Qi Kongzhi (Ch'i Kung-chih).
The Yuan government used woodblocks to print paper money, but switched to bronze plates in 1275.
Kublai besieged Xiangyang between 1268 and 1273, the last obstacle in his way to capture the rich Yangzi River basin.
Afterwards, Tugh Temür abdicated in favour of his brother Kusala, who was backed by Chagatai Khan Eljigidey, and announced Khanbaliq's intent to welcome him.
A rich cultural diversity developed during the Yuan dynasty.
At various times another central government institution called the Department of State Affairs (Shangshu Sheng) that mainly dealt with finance was established (such as during the reign of Külüg Khan or Emperor Wuzong), but was usually abandoned shortly afterwards.
The Yuan dynasty created a "Han Army" (漢軍) out of defected Jin troops and an army of defected Song troops called the "Newly Submitted Army" (新附軍).
He welcomed foreign visitors to his court, such as the Venetian merchant Marco Polo, who wrote the most influential European account of Yuan China.
He restored the Imperial Secretariat and left the local administrative structure of past Chinese dynasties unchanged.
His father was Shi Bingzhi (史秉直, Shih Ping-chih).
Under the Mongols, the practice of Chinese medicine spread to other parts of the empire.
The city of Beijing was rebuilt with new palace grounds that included artificial lakes, hills and mountains, and parks.
Kublai originally named his eldest son, Zhenjin, as the Crown Prince, but he died before Kublai in 1285.
Many Han Chinese and Khitan defected to the Mongols to fight against the Jin.
Möngke Khan commenced a military campaign against the Chinese Song dynasty in southern China.
After the death of Tugh Temür in 1332 and subsequent death of Rinchinbal (Emperor Ningzong) the same year, the 13-year-old Toghun Temür (Emperor Huizong), the last of the nine successors of Kublai Khan, was summoned back from Guangxi and succeeded to the throne.
The Chinese medical tradition of the Yuan had "Four Great Schools" that the Yuan inherited from the Jin dynasty.
The Chinese-style elements of the bureaucracy mainly came from the native Tang, Song, as well as Khitan Liao and Jurchen Jin dynasties.
Another important aspect of Yuan times is the increasing incorporation of the then current, vernacular Chinese into both the ''qu'' form of poetry and the ''zaju'' variety show.
He made many reforms, including the liquidation of the Department of State Affairs (), which resulted in the execution of five of the highest-ranking officials.
In traditional historiography of China, on the other hand, the Yuan dynasty is usually considered to be the legitimate dynasty between the Song dynasty and the Ming dynasty.
The opening pages contain a diagram of Pascal's triangle.
Yingchang was seized by the Ming shortly after his death.
However, the corruption in the Yuan dynasty began during the reign of Temür Khan.
The vizier Rashid-al-Din recognized that printing was a valuable technological breakthrough, and expressed regret that the Mongol experiment with printing paper money had failed in the Muslim world.
Kublai's government faced financial difficulties after 1279.
Liu Heima and Shi Tianxiang led armies against Western Xia for the Mongols.
But at the same time he never abandoned his Mongolian heritage.
Chagaan (Tsagaan) and Zhang Rou jointly launched an attack on the Song dynasty ordered by Töregene Khatun.
However, most published works were still produced through traditional block printing techniques.
The Mongols defeated the loyalists at the battle of Yamen in 1279.
Western medicine was also practiced in China by the Nestorian Christians of the Yuan court, where it was sometimes labeled as ''huihui'' or Muslim medicine.
In official Chinese histories, the Yuan dynasty bore the Mandate of Heaven, following the Song dynasty and preceding the Ming dynasty.
Two Han Chinese leaders, Shi Tianze, Liu Heima (劉黑馬, Liu Ni), and the Khitan Xiao Zhala (蕭札剌) defected and commanded the 3 Tumens in the Mongol army.
His realm was, by this point, isolated from the other khanates and controlled most of present-day China and its surrounding areas, including modern Mongolia and Korea.
The establishment of the Yuan dynasty had dramatically increased the number of Muslims in China.
While the official terminology of the institutions may indicate the government structure was almost purely that of native Chinese dynasties, the Yuan bureaucracy actually consisted of a mix of elements from different cultures.
Khublai evoked his public image as a sage emperor by following the rituals of Confucian propriety and ancestor veneration, while simultaneously retaining his roots as a leader from the steppes.
Some Yuan documents such as Wang Zhen's ''Nong Shu'' were printed with earthenware movable type, a technology invented in the 12th century.
Chinese physicians were brought along military campaigns by the Mongols as they expanded towards the west.
However, Kusala suddenly died only four days after a banquet with Tugh Temür.
By 1387 the remaining Yuan forces in Manchuria under Naghachu had also surrendered to the Ming dynasty.
In Yuan poetry, the main development was the ''qu'', which was used among other poetic forms by most of the famous Yuan poets.
Kublai convened a kurultai in Kaiping that elected him Great Khan.
In time, Kublai Khan's successors lost all influence on other Mongol lands across Asia, while the Mongols beyond the Middle Kingdom saw them as too Chinese.
For example, the authority of the Yuan legal system, the Ministry of Justice, did not extend to legal cases involving Mongols and Semuren, who had separate courts of justice.
Thus, Zhenjin's third son, with the support of his mother Kökejin and the minister Bayan, succeeded the throne and ruled as Temür Khan, or Emperor Chengzong, from 1294 to 1307.
“If you slaughter sheep, you will be considered guilty of a crime.” He issued a regulation to that effect ...
Kublai created the Imperial Academy of Medicine to manage medical treatises and the education of new doctors.
Under the reign of Genghis' third son, Ögedei Khan, the Mongols destroyed the weakened Jin dynasty in 1234, conquering most of northern China.
Chinese advisers such as Liu Bingzhong and Yao Shu gave strong influence to Kublai's early court, and the central government administration was established within the first decade of Kublai's reign.
The Tran dynasty originated from the Fujian region of China as did the Daoist cleric Xu Zongdao who recorded the Mongol invasion and referred to them as "Northern bandits".
One of his successful projects was to finish the long-stalled official histories of the Liao, Jin, and Song dynasties, which were eventually completed in 1345.
Genghis Khan directly called Muslims and Jews "slaves" and demanded that they follow the Mongol method of eating rather than the halal method.
He had no choice but to rely on local warlords' military power, and gradually lost his interest in politics and ceased to intervene in political struggles.
Chinese printing technology was transferred to the Mongols through Kingdom of Qocho and Tibetan intermediaries.
His favorite wife died in 1281 and so did his chosen heir in 1285.
His method is described in the ''Jade Mirror of the Four Unknowns'', written in 1303.
Partner merchants and non-Mongol overseers were usually either immigrants or local ethnic groups.
However, Kublai rejected plans to revive the Confucian imperial examinations and divided Yuan society into three, later four, classes with the Han Chinese occupying the lowest rank.
Kublai wished to persuade the Chinese that he was becoming increasingly sinicized while maintaining his Mongolian credentials with his own people.
Uninterested in administration, they were separated from both the army and the populace, and China was torn by dissension and unrest.
The Mongols characterized ''otachi'' doctors by their use of herbal remedies, which was distinguished from the spiritual cures of Mongol shamanism.
Temür Khan decided to maintain and continue much of the work begun by his grandfather.
Many of the poets were also involved in the major developments in the theater during this time, and the other way around, with people important in the theater becoming famous through the development of the ''sanqu'' type of ''qu''.
Some Muslim communities had the name in Chinese meaning "barracks" and also meaning "thanks"; many Hui Muslims claim it is because that they played an important role in overthrowing the Mongols and it was named in thanks by the Han Chinese for assisting them.
"Dà Yuán" (大元) is from the sentence "" (dà zai Qián Yuán / "Great is Qián, the Primal") in the ''Commentaries on the Classic of Changes (I Ching)'' section regarding Qián (乾).
The Chinese region of Fujian was the original home of the Chinese Tran (Chen) clan before they migrated under Trần Kinh (陳京, Chén Jīng) to Dai Viet and whose descendants established the Trần dynasty which ruled Vietnam Đại Việt, and certain members of the clan could still speak Chinese such as when a Yuan dynasty envoy had a meeting with the Chinese-speaking Trần prince Trần Quốc Tuấn (later King Trần Hưng Đạo) in 1282.
As such, the Yuan was also sometimes referred to as the '''Empire of the Great Khan'''.
Since Kublai Khan only esteemed the Sakya sect of Tibetan Buddhism, other religions became less important.
He also gave a few early signs of a new and positive direction in central government.
Huihui doctors staffed at two imperial hospitals were responsible for treating the imperial family and members of the court.
Gegeen was assassinated in a coup involving five princes from a rival faction, perhaps steppe elite opposed to Confucian reforms.
Kublai Khan suppressed rebellions challenging his rule in Tibet and the northeast.
Shi Tianze was a Han Chinese who lived in the Jin dynasty.
He was supposedly killed with poison by El Temür, and Tugh Temür then remounted the throne.
Buddhism had a great influence in the Yuan government, and the Tibetan-rite Tantric Buddhism had significantly influenced China during this period.
Often in terms of the further development of landscape painting as well as the classical joining together of the arts of painting, poetry, and calligraphy, the Song dynasty and the Yuan dynasty are linked together.
Marco Polo documented the Yuan printing of paper money and almanac pamphlets called ''tacuini''.
Mongolian Buddhist translations, almost all from Tibetan originals, began on a large scale after 1300.
Confucian governmental practices and examinations based on the Classics, which had fallen into disuse in north China during the period of disunity, were reinstated by the Yuan court, probably in the hope of maintaining order over Han society.
The Yuan minister Bolad was sent to Iran, where he explained Yuan paper money to the Il-khanate court of Gaykhatu.
Tugh Temür supported Zhu Xi's Neo-Confucianism and also devoted himself in Buddhism.
The Mongol custom of long standing quda/marriage alliance with Mongol clans, the Onggirat, and the Ikeres, kept the imperial blood purely Mongol until the reign of Tugh Temur, whose mother was a Tangut concubine.
Road and water communications were reorganized and improved.
From this period dates the conversion to Islam, by Muslims of Central Asia, of growing numbers of Chinese in the northwest and southwest.
Major commerce during this era gave rise to favorable conditions for private southern Chinese manufacturers and merchants.
One of the key factors in the mix of the ''zaju variety show'' was the incorporation of poetry both classical and of the newer ''qu'' form.
By the time he died, China was in severe debt and the Yuan court faced popular discontent.
Mongols are widely known to worship the Eternal Heaven, and according to the traditional Mongolian ideology Yuan is considered to be "the beginning of an infinite number of beings, the foundation of peace and happiness, state power, the dream of many peoples, besides it there is nothing great or precious."
Kublai depended on the cooperation of his Chinese subjects to ensure that his army received ample resources.
Furthermore, Mongol patronage of Buddhism resulted in a number of monuments of Buddhist art.
Han Chinese were moved to Central Asian areas like Besh Baliq, Almaliq, and Samarqand by the Mongols where they worked as artisans and farmers.
Muslims had to slaughter sheep in secret.
Since its invention in 1269, the 'Phags-pa script, a unified script for spelling Mongolian, Tibetan, and Chinese languages, was preserved in the court until the end of the dynasty.
In response to an objection against the use of "barbarians" in his government, the Yongle Emperor answered: "...
Starting in 1313 the traditional imperial examinations were reintroduced for prospective officials, testing their knowledge on significant historical works.
During the Yuan period, Beijing became the terminus of the Grand Canal of China, which was completely renovated.
Kublai expanded the Grand Canal from southern China to Daidu in the north.
Kublai readied the move of the Mongol capital from Karakorum in Mongolia to Khanbaliq in 1264, constructing a new city near the former Jurchen capital Zhongdu, now modern Beijing, in 1266.
He continued his father's policies to reform the government based on the Confucian principles, with the help of his newly appointed grand chancellor Baiju.
The Mongol rulers patronized the Yuan printing industry.
From the late 1340s onwards, people in the countryside suffered from frequent natural disasters such as droughts, floods and the resulting famines, and the government's lack of effective policy led to a loss of popular support.
When Yesün Temür died in Shangdu in 1328, Tugh Temür was recalled to Khanbaliq by the Qipchaq commander El Temür.
Kublai botched his campaigns against Annam, Champa, and Java, but won a Pyrrhic victory against Burma.
The earlier they surrendered to the Mongols, the higher they were placed, the more the held out, the lower they were ranked.
The other cultures and peoples in the Mongol World Empire also very much influenced China.
However, unlike the western khanates, the Yuan dynasty never converted to Islam.
Genghis Khan and the following Yuan emperors forbade Islamic practices like Halal butchering, forcing Mongol methods of butchering animals on Muslims, and other restrictive degrees continued.
The surnames of his Jurchen wives were Mo-nien and Na-ho; the surname of his Korean wife was Li; and the surname of his Han Chinese wife was Shi.
The latter believe that Han Chinese were treated as second-class citizens, and that China stagnated economically and scientifically.
Japanese historians like Uematsu, Sugiyama and Morita criticized the perception that a four class system existed under Mongol rule and Funada Yoshiyuki questioned the very existence of the Semu as a class.
Most of the Emperors could not master written Chinese, but they could generally converse well in the language.
The system of bureaucracy created by Kublai Khan reflected various cultures in the empire, including that of the Han Chinese, Khitans, Jurchens, Mongols, and Tibetan Buddhists.
His first administration clearly exhibited fresh new spirit.
During the war fighting the Mongols, among the Ming Emperor Zhu Yuanzhang's armies was the Hui Muslim Feng Sheng.
Shi Tianze defected to Mongol forces upon their invasion of the Jin dynasty.
Some Muslim communities had a Chinese surname which meant "barracks" and could also mean "thanks".
The average Mongol garrison family of the Yuan dynasty seems to have lived a life of decaying rural leisure, with income from the harvests of their Chinese tenants eaten up by costs of equipping and dispatching men for their tours of duty.
Outlaws ravaged the country without interference from the weakening Yuan armies.
By 1328, annual sales of printed calendars and almanacs reached over three million in the Yuan dynasty.
