Yunnan has a generally mild climate with pleasant and fair weather because of the province's location on south-facing mountain slopes, receiving the influence of both the Pacific and Indian oceans, and although the growing period is long, the rugged terrain provides little arable land.
Qujing Economic and Technological Development Zone (QETDZ) is a provincial development zone approved by Yunnan Provincial Government in August 1992.
Yunnan's abundance in resources determines that the province's pillar industries are: agriculture, tobacco, mining, hydro-electric power, and tourism.
Major ethnic groups include Yi, Bai, Hani, Zhuang, Dai and Miao.
* the Red River (Yuan or Honghe) has its source in the mountains south of Dali and enters the South China Sea through Hanoi, Vietnam
* G80 Guangkun Expressway from Guangzhou to Kunming
Kunming city is expected to add 11 new mid- to high-end hotels with an inventory of under 4,000 rooms between 2012 and 2016.
There are several major lakes in Yunnan.
The Qing armies only massacred Muslims who had rebelled or supported the rebels and spared Muslims who took no part in the uprising.
It was seized by the Japanese in 1942 and reopened when it was connected to the Stilwell Road from India.
Generally, rivers are obstacles to transport in Yunnan.
The Naxi, in particular, use the Dongba script, which is the only pictographic writing system in use in the world today.
To expand the burgeoning trade with Burma and India, Emperor Wu also sent  to maintain and expand the Five Foot Way, renaming it "Southwest Barbarian Way" ().
Zhao() was an indigenous non-Chinese language term meaning "king" or "kingdom."
* G78 Shankun Expressway from Shantou to Kunming
There were dire shortages of food, equipment, books, clothing and other essential needs, but they managed to conduct the running of a modern university.
The 800 faculty and students who were left had to flee and made the 1,000 mile journey to Kunming, capital of Yunnan in China's mountainous southwest.
During the Three Kingdoms, the territory of present-day Yunnan, western Guizhou and southern Sichuan was collectively called Nanzhong.
Yunnan has trade contacts with more than seventy countries and regions in the world.
The dissolution of Chinese central authority led to increased autonomy for Yunnan and more power for the local tribal structures.
It has  under its jurisdiction.
Apart from sales on the domestic market, Yunnan also exports to a number of foreign countries and regions such as Japan, Korea, Hong Kong, Thailand and Singapore.
Generally speaking, Nanzhao was then the most powerful kingdom in mainland Southeast Asia, and played an extremely active role in multistate interactions.
The line would not enter into operation until 1970, the same year that the Chengdu-Kunming was completed.
Nanzhao) in the two Annam battles.The autumn of 866 saw Tang victory in Hanoi and soon all of the Nanzhao forces were driven away.
On the steep slopes in the west livestock is raised and timber, a valuable resource, is cut (teak in the southwest).
* Yuanyang, a Hani minority settlement with vast rice-terraced mountains.
Secondary industry is currently the largest industrial tier in Yunnan, contributing more than 45 percent of GDP.
More than 150 kinds of minerals have been discovered in the province.
KMHNZ is located in the northwest part of Kunming city, 4 kilometers from Kunming Railway Station, 5 kilometers from Kunming International Airport.
It spans approximately  and has a population of 45.7 million (2009).
Export amounted to US$18 million.
The lineage of tribal way of life of the indigenous peoples persisted uninfluenced by modernity until the mid-20th century.
Expressways running through Yunnan province are:
Iron chain bridges are still found across high river valleys of Yunnan.
Burma is now one of Yunnan's biggest foreign trade partners.
It became the seat of a Sino-Tibetan-speaking kingdom of Nanzhao in the 8th century CE.
* Dianchi Lake, near Kunming
Road construction in Yunnan continues unabated: over the last years the province has added more new roads than any other province.
Tang China did not give up after one failure.
That line is planned to be extended further north to Xamgyi'nyilha County.
Also a different trend is slowly developing; small scale and environmentally friendly ecotourism.
Yunnan has sufficient rainfall and many rivers and lakes.
First established in 1992, Kunming Economic & Technology Development Zone is a national-level zone approved by the State Council.
It is reported that the Tang forces lost over 150,000 soldiers (either killed or captured by
* China National Highway 108
In the west, the altitude can vary from the mountain peaks to river valleys as much as .
* Cang Mountain & Erhai Lake Tourism and Vacation Zone at Dali
It is located in the east of urban Qujing, the second largest city in Yunnan in terms of economic strengths.
Tobacco is the main (export) product and makes up a big part of the provincial GDP.
Luofu Expressway begins from the crossroads of Luo Village between Yunnan and Guangxi Provinces and ends at Funing County of Wenshan State.
The eastern part of the province is a limestone plateau with karst topography and unnavigable rivers flowing through deep mountain gorges.
Bridge-building in Yunnan date back at least 1,300 years when the Tibetan Empire built an iron chain bridge over the Yangtze to the neighboring Nanzhao Kingdom at what is today Weixi Lisu Autonomous County during the Tang Dynasty.
See ''Agriculture in Yunnan''.
Only very small parts of Yunnan's river systems are navigable.
The eastern half of the province is a limestone plateau with karst scenery and unnavigable rivers flowing through deep mountain gorges; the western half is characterised by mountain ranges and rivers running north and south.
Over those eight years of war (1937-1945), Lianda became famous nationwide for having and producing many, if not most, of China's most prominent academics, scholars, scientists and intellectuals.
Some groups, such as the Mosuo, who are officially recognised as part of the Naxi, have in the past claimed official status as a national minority, and are now recognised with the status of Mosuo people.
* Dali Economic and Technological Development Zone
As of 2000, there were 24 institutions of higher learning in Yunnan, with an enrollment of over 90,400 students and a faculty of 9,237; 2,562 secondary schools with an enrollment of more than 2,137,400 students and 120,461 teachers; and 22,151 primary schools with an enrollment of 4,720,600 pupils and a faculty of 210,507.
The location of the development zone is the economic, political and cultural center of Qujing.
Due in part to difficult terrain both locally and in surrounding provinces and the shortage of capital for rail construction, Yunnan remained outside of China's domestic rail network until 1966 when the Guiyang–Kunming Railway was completed.
The Mongolian prince sent to administer the region with them was killed.
Other notable establishments of learning are the Kunming branch of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, the Yunnan Astronomical Observatory, and the Yunnan Provincial Library.
While Nanzhao was being defeated in Annam, it still occasionally attacked Sichuan.
The province is extending the railway network to neighboring countries in Southeast Asia.
* Yangzonghai Lake Tourism and Vacation Zone
Although largely forgotten, the bloody Panthay Rebellion of the Muslim Hui people and other local minorities against the Manchu rulers of the Qing Dynasty caused the deaths of up to a million people in Yunnan.
In 2002 the flower industry in Yunnan had a total output of RMB 3.4 billion.
It is an important industry for the development of new-type industry platform.
Colonizers moved into the area during Ming and Qing rule.
The main manufacturing industries are iron and steel production and copper-smelting, commercial vehicles, chemicals, fertilizers, textiles, and optical instruments.
The so-called 'pine mushroom' is the main product in Yunnan and is exported to Japan in large quantities.
Yunnan has proven deposits of 86 kinds of minerals in 2,700 places.
Yunnan is the source of two rivers, the Xi River (there known as the Nanpan and Hongshui) and the Yuan River.
The share of GDP of Yunnan's primary, secondary, and tertiary industries were 17.9%, 43%, and 39.1% respectively.
At the moment projects in this field are often being set up with help of NGO's.
The Mongols conquered the region in the 13th century, with local control exercised by warlords until the 1930s.
Yunnan has several different tea growing regions.
A main source of wealth lies in its vast mineral resources; indeed, mining is the leading industry in Yunnan.
Ten ethnic minorities living in border areas and river valleys include the Hui, Manchu, Bai, Naxi, Mongolian, Zhuang, Dai, Achang, Buyei and Shui, with a combined population of 4.5 million; those in low mountainous areas are the Hani, Yao, Lahu, Va, Jingpo, Blang and Jino, with a combined population of 5 million; and those in high mountainous areas are Miao, Lisu, Tibetan, Pumi and Drung, with a total population of four million.
When the Tang governor of Annam took Bozhou back in the following year, Nanzhao, with the help of native peoples, occupied Hanoi as the Tang army moved to Bozhou.
The Ming installed Mu Ying and his family as hereditary aristocrats in Yunnan.
The main challenge that Yunnan faces is its lack of major development.
Yunnan  is situated in a mountainous area, with high elevations in the northwest and low elevations in the southeast.
More than 80 countries and regions were present during the 2005 edition.
Yunnan ranks first in the country in deposits of zinc, lead, tin, cadmium, indium, thallium and crocidolite.
The plateau region has moderate temperatures.
* Wanding Border Economic Cooperation Zone
The electricity industry is another important economic pillar of Yunnan, which plays a key role in the "West-East Electricity Transmission Project".
With an input of 3.15 billion yuan in 2002, the absolutely poor rural population in the province has been reduced from 4.05 million in 2000 to 2.86 million.
* Erhai Lake, near Dali City
There is a distinct canyon region to the west and a plateau region to the east.
This line could be extended further south to Thailand, Malaysia and Singapore.
The zone implemented several policies to serve its clients in China from various industries and sectors including investment, trade, finance, taxation, immigration, etc.
Within the province, the Kunming–Yuxi, opened in 1993, and the Guangtong–Dali, opened in 1998, expanded the rail network to southern and western Yunnan, respectively.
Rice is the main crop; corn, barley, wheat, rapeseed, sweet potatoes, soybeans (as a food crop), tea, sugarcane, tobacco, and cotton are also grown.
As an agency under Qujing municipal Party committee and municipal government, the administrative commission of QETDZ functions as an economy supervising body at the prefecture level and an administration body at the county level.
Level land for agriculture is extremely scarce and only about 5 percent of the province is under cultivation.
The commandery seat was at Dianchi county in present-day Jinning.
Henceforth the Cuan clan ruled eastern Yunnan for over four hundred years.
* the Salween (Nujiang), which flows into the Gulf of Martaban and the Andaman Sea through Burma
* Lijiang, a Naxi minority city.
In 738, the western Yunnan was united by Piluoge, the fourth king of Nanzhao, who was confirmed by the imperial court of the Tang Dynasty as king of Yunnan.
As with other parts of China's southwest, Japanese occupation in the north during World War II forced a migration of majority Han people into the region.
In Zhaotong in northeastern Yunnan, there has been discovered, frescos of the Jin Dynasty (265–420).
Other notable explorers include Heinrich Handel-Mazzetti; George Forrest; Joseph Francis Charles Rock, who from 1922–1949 spent most of his time studying the flora, peoples and languages of southwest China, mainly in Yunnan; and Peter Goullart, a White Russian who studied Naxi culture and lived in Lijiang from 1940 to 1949.
The province is also known for its Yunnan Gold and other Dianhong teas, developed in the 20th century.
After the opening of the Suolongsi to Pingyuanjie expressway, Luofu expressway, the first between Yunnan and Guangxi Province, opened on October 2007.
Despite progress made, Yunnan's illiteracy rate remains one of the highest in China mainly due to insufficient education among minority peoples.
The Yunxi brand refined tin is one of the main products in Gejiu, which is registered on the London Metal Exchange (LME).
* Tengchong Tourism and Vacation Zone
Nanzhao's expansion lasted for several decades.
Among the six regimes Mengshe was located south of the other five; therefore given the new, larger context, it was called Nanzhao (Southern Kingdom).
His seven captures of Meng Huo, a local magnate, is much celebrated in Chinese folklore.
This gives the alpine flora in particular what one source has called a "lushness found nowhere else".
Significant copper deposits are found at Dongchuan, iron ore at Wuding, and coal at Xuanwei and Kaiyuan.
When it retreated, hundreds of Sichuan people, including skilled artisans, were taken to Yunnan.
One of Yunnan's best known products is Pu-erh tea (or Puer), named after the old tea trading town of Pu-erh (Puer).
Yunnan's cultural life is one of remarkable diversity.
* Kunming Airport Economic Zone
Some already disappeared and are most likely extinct, like the Yunnan box turtle and the Yunnan lar gibbon.
Both of China's only Nobel laureates in physics studied at Lianda in Kunming.
The poverty alleviation plan includes five large projects aimed at improving infrastructure facilities.
In 109 BC, Emperor Wu sent General Guo Chang (郭昌) south to Yunnan, establishing Yizhou commandery and 24 subordinate counties.
Some 13% of the proved deposits of minerals are the largest of their kind in China, and two-thirds of the deposits are among the largest of their kind in the Yangtze River valley and in south China.
The first railway in Yunnan was the narrow gauge Yunnan–Vietnam Railway built by France from 1904 to 1910 to connect Kunming with Vietnam, then a French colony.
By the 730s Nanzhao had succeeded in bringing the Erhai Lake–area under its authority.
When the Tang forces returned, Nanzhao troops retreated from Hanoi but attacked and plundered Yongzhou.
Commanderies and counties were established in Yunnan.
The Kunming High-tech Industrial Development Zone (KMHNZ), is a state-level high-tech industrial zone established in 1992 in Northwest Kunming.
It has covers an area of .
* Shilin (Stone Forest), a series of karst outcrops east of Kunming.
Economic policy to locate new industry in interior areas with substantial mineral wealth, led to major industrial development in Yunnan, especially in the Kunming area.
Yunnan is home to, most notably, the southeast Asian gaur, a giant forest-dwelling ox, the Indochinese tiger and the Asian elephant.
* Songming Yanglin Experimental Zone for County & Township Industries
Water levels in Yilong Lake dropped and grass was reported growing in the middle of the lake bed.
The Yuanmou Man, a ''Homo erectus'' fossil unearthed by railway engineers in the 1960s, has been determined to be the oldest-known hominid fossil in China.
* Xishuangbanna, a national scenic resort, noted for its natural and cultural attractions.
In 902, Zheng Maisi, the qingpingguan (,"Primier Minister") of Nanzhao, murdered the infant king of Nanzhao, and established a short-lived regime, namely, Da Chang He.
The size of the planting area for cut flowers in Yunnan province amounts to 4000 hectares.
Archaeological findings have unearthed sacred burial structures holding elegant bronzes in Jinning, south of Kunming.
The Nanning–Kunming Railway to Guangxi was completed in 1997, followed by the Neijiang–Kunming Railway in 2001.
It has a planned area of .
Moreover, Luofu Expressway has also become the main road from Yunnan to Guangxi and the coastal ports.
Howerver, Xianyu Zhongtong detained the Nanzhao envoys and turned down the appeal.
*Hekou–Lào Cai, by road and rail, is the only Sino-Vietnamese land border crossing open to non-Chinese/non-Vietnamese.
* the Yangtze River, here known as the Jinsha Jiang (River of Golden Sands), drains the province's north.
Yunnan mainly exports tobacco, machinery and electrical equipment, chemical and agricultural products, and non-ferrous metals.
The province is drained by six major river systems:
Creating an adventure tourism sector would bring valuable economic resources to the economically struggling population, who had once relied on logging as income prior to it being banned due to deforestation.
Christianity is dominant among the Lisu, the Jingpo and the Derung ethnic groups.
However, because of its geographic location the province has comparative advantages in regional and border trade with countries in southeast Asia.
Yunnan province accounts for 50% of China's total cut flower production.
In this area is the noted Stone Forest or Shilin, eroded vertical pinnacles of limestone (Maokou Formation).
Yunnan is China's most diverse province, biologically as well as culturally.
Ethnic groups are widely distributed in the province.
But with the fall of the Yuan Dynasty in 1368, the Ming Dynasty destroyed the Yuan loyalists led by Basalawarmi in the Ming conquest of Yunnan by the early 1380s.
* Hekou Border Economic Cooperation Zone
Yunnan's major rivers flow through the deep valleys between the mountains.
In 754, the Tang organized an army of more than 100,000 troops that advanced to the Dali plain, resulting in only another slaughter.
The annual volume of goods transported was two million tons and that of passengers transported, two million.
Yunnan is noted for a very high level of ethnic diversity.
By the Neolithic period, there were human settlements in the area of Lake Dian.
In 2004, tourism revenues amounted to 37 billion RMB, and thus accounting for 12, 6% of the provincial GDP.
The Han–Dian wars began under Emperor Wu.
The Dongba script was mainly used to provide the Dongba priests with instructions on how to carry out their rituals: today the Dongba script features more as a tourist attraction.
In China, there are 938 kinds of edible mushrooms, and over 800 varieties can be found in Yunnan.
The terrain is largely mountainous, especially in the north and west.
In recent years land transportation has been improved to strengthen economic and trade co-operation among countries in the Greater Mekong Subregion.
Investment is the key driver of Yunnan's economic growth, especially in construction.
Other deposits include iron, coal, copper, gold, mercury, silver, antimony and sulfur.
*  Jiegao Border Trade Economic Zone
In 2003, the output totaled 2.3 billion stems.
Yunnan is one of the major production bases of copper, lead, zinc, tin and aluminum in China.
He dispatched a series of military campaigns against the Dian during the southward expansion of the Han Dynasty.
Yunnan is rich in natural resources and has the largest diversity of plant life in China.
Mainland tourists travel by the masses; 2.75 million Chinese visited Yunnan last October during National Holiday.
The rich water resources offer abundant hydro-energy.
Yunnan is the most southwestern province in China, with the Tropic of Cancer running through its southern part.
Nanzhao also attacked the Khmer peoples of Zhenla.
In 1995, the province put an investment of 171 million yuan to add another  of navigation lines.
The Dali–Lijiang Railway, opened in 2010, brought rail service to northwestern Yunnan.
After several years' development, the zone has formed its pillar industries, which include tobacco processing, machinery manufacturing, electronic information, and biotechnology.
In 753, another expedition was prepared, but thiswas also defeated by Nanzhao.
* China National Highway 320
Home of the Yi ethnic minority and their respective ancient town.
In 874, Nanzhao attacked Sichuan again.
An extension runs east through China from Kunming, then north to Chongqing.
The zone covers an area of 12&nbsp;km2, composed of four parks.
In 1944 the Ledo Road reached Myitkyina and was joined to the Burma Road.
In 1994, about 7 million people lived below the poverty line of less than an annual average income of 300 yuan per capita.
In 859, Nanzhao captured Bozhou, and this event exacerbated the Nanzhao-Tang clashes.
The Lancang River (upper reaches of Mekong River) is the waterway to southeast Asia.
In Yunnan, the Chinese section of this railway is known as the Yunnan-Hekou Railway and the line gave Yunnan access to the seaport at Haiphong.
It has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1997.
The Yunnan camellia (''Camellia reticulata'') is the provincial emblem.
The mountains are highest in the north where they reach more than ; in the south they rise no higher than .
The Hongshui is a principal source stream of the Xi River.
Evening, time off work / study leave classes allow people to receive education without leaving their jobs.
