Over the next several years, he began to purchase slaves and a good deal of bank stock in Louisville.
Though greatly outnumbered, he defeated the Mexican force, which consisted of the ''Army of the North'', commanded by General Mariano Arista, and forced the troops back across the Rio Grande.
Fillmore's selection was largely an attempt at reconciliation with northern Whigs, who were furious at the election of a slaveowning southerner; all factions of the party were dissatisfied with the final ticket.
He defeated the Seminole Indians in the Christmas Day Battle of Lake Okeechobee, which was among the largest U.S.–Indian battles of the nineteenth century.
Afterwards, half of Taylor's army was ordered to join General Winfield Scott's soldiers as they besieged Veracruz.
His major goal was sectional peace, preserving the Union through legislative compromise.
* Mary Elizabeth "Betty" Taylor (1824–1909), married William Wallace Smith Bliss in 1848 (he died 1853), married Philip Pendleton Dandridge in 1858.
(2) Bauer, p. 314(3)  At Google Books.
*Rough and Ready, California; the historical origin of the town is depicted in a 1965 episode of the syndicated western television series, ''Death Valley Days''.
The remains were returned to the cemetery and reinterred, with appropriate honors, in the mausoleum.
After this, most of Taylor's troops were transferred to the command of Major General Winfield Scott, but Taylor's popularity remained significant.
The Taylor administration considered combining the California and Utah territories, but instead opted to organize the Utah Territory.
The US Post Office released the first postage stamp issue honoring Zachary Taylor on June 21, 1875, 25 years after his death.
The territory newly won from Mexico was under federal jurisdiction, but the Texans claimed a swath of land north of Santa Fe and were determined to include it within their borders, despite having no significant presence there.
The city of Monterrey had been considered "impregnable", but was captured in three days, forcing Mexican forces to retreat.
By late 1846 Taylor's opposition to a presidential run began to weaken, and it became clear that his principles more closely resembled Whig orthodoxy.
Taylor's second cousin through that line was James Madison, the fourth president.
In a more positive effort, the administration arranged for two ships to assist in the United Kingdom's search for a team of British explorers, led by John Franklin, who had gotten lost in the Arctic.
The end of the war in August 1832 signaled the end of Indian resistance to U.S. expansion in the area, and the following years were relatively quiet.
He won the election alongside New York politician Millard Fillmore, defeating Democratic candidates Lewis Cass and William Orlando Butler, as well as a third party effort led by former President Martin Van Buren and Charles Francis Adams, Sr. of the Free Soil Party.
After Washington, Jefferson, Jackson and Lincoln, Zachary Taylor was the fifth American president to appear on US postage.
Taylor campaigned under General Henry Atkinson to pursue and later defend against Chief Black Hawk's forces throughout the summer.
Taylor's term as president began Sunday, March 4, but his inauguration was not held until the following day out of religious concerns.
Samples of hair, fingernail, and other tissues were removed, and radiological studies were conducted.
He re-entered it a year later after gaining a commission as a major.
I should not be surprised if this were to terminate in my death.
He reported on California's and New Mexico's applications for statehood, and recommended that Congress approve them as written and "should abstain from the introduction of those exciting topics of a sectional character".
He had been involved in a fifteen-year case, representing the descendants of a colonial trader whose services to the British crown had not been repaid at the time of the American Revolution.
Their shared nationalism allowed Taylor to devolve foreign policy matters to Clayton with minimal oversight, although no decisive foreign policy was established under their administration.
That November he was transferred to Fort Robertson at Baton Rouge, where he remained until February 1824.
"Such an idea never entered my head," he remarked in a letter, "nor is it likely to enter the head of any sane person."
God knows I have endeavored to fulfill what I conceived to be an honest duty.
He spent the months following the election formulating his cabinet selections.
*Zachary Taylor Parkway in Louisiana  and in Zachary Taylor Hall at Southeastern Louisiana University.
The remains were exhumed and transported to the Office of the Kentucky Chief Medical Examiner on June 17, 1991.
In 1938, Taylor would appear again on a US Postage stamp, this time on the 12-cent Presidential Issue of 1938.
He bought a plantation in Louisville for $95,000 that had 83 slaves attached to it, as well as the Cypress Grove Plantation near Rodney, Jefferson County, Mississippi, bringing the total number of slaves under him above 200.
In late 1826 he was called to Washington, D.C., to work on an Army committee to consolidate and improve military organization.
The Texas government, under newly instated governor P. Hansborough Bell, tried to ramp up military action in defense of the territory against the federal government, but was unsuccessful.
Historians disagree on his motivations for doing so.
Unfortunately for the younger Taylor, the Virginia society had disbanded shortly before the elder Taylor's death, which prevented him from succeeding to his father's "seat" in the Society.
He was also the namesake for architect Zachary Taylor Davis.
He was promoted to brigadier general in recognition of his success.
As president, Taylor kept his distance from Congress and his cabinet, even as partisan tensions threatened to divide the Union.
Fever ensued and Taylor's chance of recovery was small.
Taylor was a descendant of Elder William Brewster, the Pilgrim colonist leader of the Plymouth Colony, a ''Mayflower'' immigrant, and one of the signers of the Mayflower Compact; and Isaac Allerton Jr., a colonial merchant and colonel who was the son of ''Mayflower'' Pilgrim Isaac Allerton and Fear Brewster.
Slavery would be retained in the District of Columbia, but the slave trade would be banned.
This would include the disputed parts of New Mexico, although Texas would be reimbursed for the territory.
In June 1810, Taylor married Margaret Mackall Smith, whom he had met the previous autumn in Louisville.
I did not expect to encounter what has beset me since my elevation to the Presidency.
He respected Davis but did not approve of his daughter becoming a military wife, as he knew it was a hard life for families.
He was the third of five surviving sons in his family (a sixth died in infancy) and had three younger sisters.
The analysis concluded Taylor had contracted "cholera morbus, or acute gastroenteritis", as Washington had open sewers, and his food or drink may have been contaminated.
He was promoted to captain in November 1810.
His inauguration speech discussed the many tasks facing the nation, but presented a governing style of deference to Congress and sectional compromise instead of assertive executive action.
*The SS ''Zachary Taylor'', a World War II Liberty ship
While previous Whig administrations had emphasized Pacific trade as an economic imperative, the Taylor administration took no major initiative in the Far East.
They issued a blockade, and later, authorized a mass arrest of López and his fellows, although the group would eventually be acquitted.
By the following March, Taylor had established Fort Jesup, at the Shield's Spring site southwest of Natchitoches.
He served there until July 1845, when annexation became imminent, and President James K. Polk directed him to deploy into disputed territory in Texas, "on or near the Rio Grande" near Mexico.
Well before the American victory at Buena Vista, political clubs were formed which supported Taylor for President.
Taylor ignored the Whig platform, as historian Michael F. Holt explains:
Taylor spent much of 1809 in the dilapidated camps of New Orleans and nearby Terre aux Boeufs.
The proposal allowed statehood for California, giving it independence on the slavery question, while the other territories would remain under federal jurisdiction.
Taylor began his trek to Washington in late January, a  journey rife with bad weather, delays, injuries, sickness—and an abduction by a family friend.
A House investigation cleared Crawford of any legal wrongdoing, but nonetheless expressed disapproval of his accepting the payment.
Taylor moved his growing family to Fort Knox after the violence subsided.
At that time, the Black Hawk War was beginning in the West.
Before joining the Taylor cabinet, Secretary of War George W. Crawford had served as a lawyer.
Most abolitionists did not support Taylor, since he was a slave-owner.
He was 65 years old.
Neutron activation analysis conducted at Oak Ridge National Laboratory revealed no evidence of poisoning, as arsenic levels were too low.
Taylor's men advanced to the Rio Grande in March 1846.
He was deliberate and quiet about his decisions, to the frustration of his fellow Whigs.
For his Vice Presidential nominee the convention chose Millard Fillmore,  a prominent New York Whig who had chaired the House Ways and Means Committee and had been a contender for Henry Clay's Vice Presidential nominee in the 1844 election.
That same month, Taylor commanded American forces at the Battle of Palo Alto and the nearby Battle of Resaca de la Palma.
My motives have been misconstrued, and my feelings most grossly outraged.
His success in the Second Seminole War attracted national attention and earned him the nickname "Old Rough and Ready".
Many southerners also knew that Taylor supported states' rights and was opposed to protective tariffs and government spending for internal improvements.
To avoid the question, he urged settlers in New Mexico and California to bypass the territorial stage and draft constitutions for statehood, setting the stage for the Compromise of 1850.
The treaty promoted development of an Anglo-American alliance; its completion was Taylor's last action as president.
Arguably the Taylor administration's definitive accomplishment in foreign policy was the Clayton–Bulwer Treaty of 1850, regarding a proposed inter-oceanic canal through Central America.
While he despised patronage and political games, he endured a flurry of advances from office-seekers looking to play a role in his administration.
Taylor grew up in a small woodland cabin before his family moved to a brick house with increased prosperity.
Taylor was criticized for using bloodhounds in order to track Seminole.
For two years, Taylor commanded Fort Howard at the Green Bay, Michigan Territory,  settlement.
Leaving exhausted lands, his family joined the westward migration out of Virginia and settled near what developed as Louisville, Kentucky, on the Ohio River.
As Taylor took office, Congress faced a battery of questions related to the Mexican Cession, comprising three major territories acquired by the U.S. after the Mexican War: California, New Mexico, and Utah.
The administration dispatched Rep. Thomas Butler King to California, to test the waters and advocate on behalf of statehood, knowing that the Californians were certain to adopt an anti-slavery constitution.
He was also a firm nationalist, and due to his experience of seeing many people die as a result of warfare, he believed that secession was not a good way to resolve national problems.
Taylor's last appearance (to date, 2010) on a US postage stamp occurred in 1986 when he was honored on the AMERIPEX presidential issue.
In December he received a hero's welcome in New Orleans and Baton Rouge, and his popular legacy set the stage for the 1848 presidential election.
The question of the New Mexico–Texas border was unsettled at the time of Taylor's inauguration.
The omnibus law was a major step forward but ultimately could not pass, due to extremists on both sides.
While he would not appoint any Democrats, Taylor wanted his cabinet to reflect the nation's diverse interests, and so apportioned the seats geographically.
Despite being a Southerner and a slaveholder himself, Taylor did not push for the expansion of slavery.
In 1978, Hamilton Smith based his assassination theory on the timing of drugs, the lack of confirmed cholera outbreaks, and other material.
* Margaret Smith Taylor (1819–1820), died in infancy along with Octavia when the Taylor family was stricken with a "bilious fever."
Some historians believe that Taylor was too inexperienced with politics, at a time when officials needed close ties with political operatives.
In April 1819 he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel and dined with President James Monroe.
Taylor subsequently led his troops into Mexico, where they once again defeated Mexican troops commanded by Pedro de Ampudia at the Battle of Monterrey in September.
Still, he maintained that he would only accept election as a national, independent figure, rather than a partisan loyalist.
He thought of himself as an independent, believing in a strong and sound banking system for the country, and thought that President Andrew Jackson, a Democrat, should not have allowed the Second Bank of the United States to collapse in 1836.
Gen. Thomas Jesup stepped down and placed Taylor in command of all American troops in Florida, a position he held for two years.
Negotiations were held with Britain that resulted in the landmark Clayton–Bulwer Treaty.
During the War of 1812, in which U.S. forces battled the British Empire and its Indian allies, Taylor successfully defended Fort Harrison in Indiana Territory from an Indian attack commanded by the Shawnee chief Tecumseh.
In only a few weeks, he was able to restore order in the garrison, for which he was lauded by Governor William Henry Harrison.
Taylor also said that anyone "taken in rebellion against the Union, he would hang ... with less reluctance than he had hanged deserters and spies in Mexico."
Relying on interviews and reports by forensic pathologists, he argues that the procedure used to test for arsenic poisoning was fundamentally flawed.
He was made commander of the Second Department of the Army's Western Division in May 1841.
King found that a constitutional convention was already underway, and by October 1849, the convention unanimously agreed to join the Union—and to ban slavery within their borders.
His mother was Sarah Dabney (Strother) Taylor.
Political scientist Michael Parenti questions the traditional explanation for Taylor's death.
While he would spend the following year in command of the Army's entire western division, his active military career was over.
A 2010 review concludes: "there is no definitive proof that Taylor was assassinated, nor would it appear that there is definitive proof that he was not."
Taylor was interred in the Public Vault of the Congressional Cemetery in Washington, D.C., from July 13, 1850, to October 25, 1850.
Taylor died suddenly of a stomach-related illness in July 1850, so had little impact on the sectional divide that led to civil war a decade later.
In May 1828, Taylor was called back to action, commanding Fort Snelling in Michigan Territory (now Minnesota) on the northern Mississippi River for a year, and nearby Fort Crawford for a year.
The national press compared him to George Washington and Andrew Jackson, both generals who had ascended to the presidency, although Taylor denied any interest in running for office.
Zachary Taylor was born on November 24, 1784, on a plantation in Orange County, Virginia, to a prominent family of planters of English ancestry.
"Peggy" Smith came from a prominent family of Maryland planters; she was the daughter of Major Walter Smith, who had served in the Revolutionary War.
In September, Taylor, after crossing the Rio Grande, inflicted heavy casualties upon the Mexican defenders at the Battle of Monterrey.
After some time on furlough, when he expanded his landholdings, Taylor was promoted to colonel of the 1st Infantry Regiment in April 1832.
On the orders of General Edmund P. Gaines, they set out to locate a new post more convenient to the Sabine River frontier.
The timing for statehood was in Taylor's favor, as the Gold Rush was well underway at the time of his inauguration, and California's population was exploding.
He spent the next few years on recruiting duty.
This position did not enhance his support from activist antislavery elements in the Northern U.S., as these wanted Taylor to speak out strongly in support of the Proviso, not simply fail to veto it.
In Taylor's view, the best way forward was to admit California as a state rather than a federal territory, as it would leave the slavery question out of Congress's hands.
He is inconclusively believed to have been born at the home of his maternal grandfather, Hare Forest Farm.
The identity and source of Taylor's illness are the subject of historical speculation (see below), although it is known that several of his cabinet members had come down with a similar illness.
Mexican General Antonio López de Santa Anna discovered, through an intercepted letter from Scott, that Taylor had contributed all but 6,000 of his men to the effort.
He was among the new officers commissioned by Congress in response to the Chesapeake–Leopard Affair, in which an American frigate had been boarded by the crew of a British warship, sparking calls for war.
* Richard Scott "Dick" Taylor (1826–1879), Confederate Army general, married Louise Marie Myrthe Bringier in 1851.
* Sarah Knox "Knoxie" Taylor (1814–1835), married Jefferson Davis in 1835, whom she had met through her father at the end of the Black Hawk War; she died at 21 of malaria in St. Francisville, Louisiana, shortly after her marriage.
The cemetery property has been designated as the Zachary Taylor National Cemetery.
Taylor sent his only State of the Union report to Congress in December 1849.
In 1883, the Commonwealth of Kentucky placed a 50-foot monument topped by a life-sized statue of Taylor near his grave.
On May 6, 1926, the remains of Taylor and his wife (who died in 1852) were moved to the newly constructed Taylor mausoleum, made of limestone with a granite base and marble interior, nearby.
While a southern slaveowner himself, Taylor had no particular bias toward the southern faction of Congress which sought to maintain its right to slavery.
His reputation as a military leader was growing, and with it, he began to be known as "Old Rough and Ready."
Both nations agreed not to claim control of any canal that might be built in Nicaragua.
Taylor finally arrived in the nation's capital on February 24 and soon met with the outgoing President Polk.
Taylor gained recognition and received a brevet (temporary) promotion to the rank of major.
It had no effect on Southern legislators, who saw the admission of two free states as an existential threat, and Congress remained stalled.
The Latter Day Saint settlers of modern-day Utah had established a provisional State of Deseret, an enormous swath of territory which had little hope of recognition by Congress.
*Taylor County, Iowa
During this period, he began to be interested in politics and corresponded with President William Henry Harrison.
During this period Taylor resisted the courtship of his 17-year-old daughter Sarah Knox Taylor and Lieutenant Jefferson Davis, the future President of the Confederate States of America.
Outmatched, the Mexican forces retreated, ensuring a "far-reaching" victory for the Americans.
In his capacity as a career officer, Taylor had never publicly revealed his political beliefs before 1848 nor voted before that time.
He then returned to Louisville and his family.
His remaining force included only a few hundred regular army soldiers, and Santa Anna resolved to take advantage of the situation.
Taylor was commissioned as an officer in the U.S. Army in 1808 and made a name for himself as a captain in the War of 1812.
With less than two weeks until his inauguration, he met with Clayton and hastily finalized his cabinet.
Taylor defeated Lewis Cass, the Democratic candidate, and Martin Van Buren, the Free Soil candidate.
Clay took a central role as Congress debated the slavery question.
Over the course of several days, he became severely ill with an unknown digestive ailment.
The Commonwealth of Kentucky donated two adjacent parcels of land for the project, turning the half-acre Taylor family cemetery into .
Taylor, although he did not agree with their stand in favor of protective tariffs and expensive internal improvements, aligned himself with Whig Party governing policies: the President should not be able to veto a law, unless that law was against the Constitution; that the office should not interfere with Congress; and that the power of collective decision-making, as well as the Cabinet, should be strong.
In spring 1814, he was called back into action under Brigadier General Benjamin Howard.
His doctor "diagnosed the illness as cholera morbus, a flexible mid-nineteenth-century term for intestinal ailments as diverse as diarrhea and dysentery but not related to Asiatic cholera," the latter being a widespread epidemic at the time of Taylor's death.
No great compromise reached Taylor's desk during his presidency; instead, his last days were overshadowed by the Galphin affair.
Taylor was the last President to own slaves while in office.
Debate over the slave status of the large territories claimed in the war led to threats of secession from Southerners.
He also avoided choosing prominent Whigs, sidestepping such obvious selections as Clay.
While historical rankings of Presidents of the United States have generally placed Taylor in the bottom quarter of chief executives, most surveys tend to rank him as the most effective of the four Presidents from the Whig Party.
He climbed the ranks establishing military forts along the Mississippi River and entered the Black Hawk War as a colonel in 1832.
Davis and Sarah Taylor married in June 1835, but she died three months later of malaria contracted on a summer visit to Davis' sister in St. Francisville, Louisiana.
Taylor was a member of the Aztec Club of 1847, Military Society of the Mexican War.
He saw Crittenden as a cornerstone of his administration, offering him the crucial seat of Secretary of State, but Crittenden insisted on serving out the Governorship of Kentucky to which he had just been elected.
Taylor subsequently defied orders by moving his troops further south, where, despite being severely outnumbered, he dealt a crushing blow to Mexican forces under Antonio López de Santa Anna in February 1847 at the Battle of Buena Vista.
In the late 1980s, Clara Rising, a former professor at University of Florida, persuaded Taylor's closest living relative to agree to an exhumation so that his remains could be tested.
A schoolmaster recalled Taylor as a quick learner.
The incumbent Democrat held a low opinion of Taylor, privately deeming him "without political information" and "wholly unqualified for the station" of President.
In 1845, as the annexation of Texas was underway, President James K. Polk dispatched Taylor to the Rio Grande area in anticipation of a potential battle with Mexico over the disputed Texas–Mexico border.
In the meantime he acquired his first Louisiana plantation and decided to move with his family to Baton Rouge as their home.
To alleviate the Mormon population's concerns over religious freedom, Taylor promised they would have relative independence from Congress despite being a federal territory.
Taylor chose a spot at Corpus Christi, and his Army of Occupation encamped there until the following spring in anticipation of a Mexican attack.
Despite his shortcomings, the Clayton–Bulwer Treaty affecting relations with Great Britain in Central America is "recognized as an important step in scaling down the nation's commitment to Manifest Destiny as a policy."
After his death, Vice President Millard Fillmore assumed the presidency and completed Taylor's term, which ended on March 4, 1853.
He is the namesake for several names and places throughout the United States, including:
By 1837, the Second Seminole War was underway when Taylor was directed to Florida.
For several years, Britain had been seizing strategic points, particularly the Mosquito Coast on the eastern coast of present-day Nicaragua.
The Whig Party convinced the reluctant Taylor to lead their ticket, despite his unclear platform and lack of interest in politics.
He was ordered to guard against any attempts by Mexico to reclaim the territory.
The sizable territory ran from the Mississippi River westward, south of the 37th parallel north.
He spent much of the trip plagued by gastrointestinal illness and returned to Washington by September.
He believed it was impractical to talk about expanding slavery into the western areas of the U.S., as he concluded that neither cotton nor sugar (both were produced in great quantities as a result of slavery) could be easily grown there through a plantation economy.
A perceived insult from the French minister Guillaume Tell Poussin nearly led to a break in diplomatic relations until Poussin was replaced, and a reparation dispute with Portugal resulted in harsh words from the Taylor administration.
Taylor continued to minimize his role in the campaign, preferring not to directly meet with voters or correspond regarding his political views.
Taylor was criticized for signing a "liberal" truce, rather than pressing for a large-scale surrender.
The policy report was prosaic and unemotional, but ended with a sharp condemnation of secessionists.
Violence broke out several weeks later, when some of Captain Seth B. Thornton's men were attacked by Mexican forces north of the river.
They also confronted Spain, which had arrested several Americans on the charge of piracy, but the Spaniards eventually surrendered them to maintain good relations with the U.S.
Despite treatment, Taylor died at 10:35&nbsp;p.m. on July 9, 1850.
These victories made him a popular hero, and within weeks he received a brevet promotion to major general and a formal commendation from Congress.
After his long-requested relief was granted, Taylor spent a comfortable year touring the nation with his family and meeting with military leaders.
*Taylor County in Georgia
Almost immediately after his death, rumors began to circulate that Taylor was poisoned by pro-slavery Southerners, and similar theories persisted into the 20th century.
* Ann Mackall Taylor (1811–1875), married Robert C. Wood, a U.S. Army surgeon she had met while living Fort Snelling, in 1829.
