During the period of former Yugoslavia, Zagreb remained an important economic centre of the country, and was the second largest city.
The climate of Zagreb is classified as an oceanic climate (''Cfb'' in Köppen climate classification system), near the boundary of the humid continental climate.
It is primarily used for sports purposes.
'''Technical Museum''' (18 Savska Street) was founded in 1954 and it maintains the oldest preserved machine in the area, dating from 1830, which is still operational.
Zagreb is also the seat of two private universities: the Catholic University of Croatia and the Libertas International University; as well as numerous public and private polytehnics, colleges and higher professional schools.
The new "TMK 2200", trams by the end of 2012 made around 95% of the fleet.
The museum exhibits numerous historic aircraft, cars, machinery and equipment.
It lies in the fine Secession building of the one-time Trades Hall of 1903.
The name "Zagreb" is mentioned for the first time in 1094 at the founding of the Zagreb diocese of Kaptol, and Zagreb became a free royal town in 1242, whereas the origin of the name still remains a mystery in spite of several theories.
The construction of the railway lines enabled the old suburbs to merge gradually into Donji Grad, characterised by a regular block pattern that prevails in Central European cities.
⅓ of persons in the City of Zagreb electoral register, the mayor's mandate shall be deemed revoked and special mayoral by-elections shall be held).
In 2005, suburban rail services were increased to a 15-minute frequency serving the middle and outer suburbs of Zagreb, primarily in the east-west direction and to the southern districts.
It is located in the 18th-century Raffay Palace in the Gornji Grad.
Companies in Zagreb create 52% of total turnover and 60% of total profit of Croatia in 2006 as well as 35% of Croatian export and 57% of Croatian import.
Column 4 is calculated for the territory now defined as the City of Zagreb (Narodne Novine 97/10).
A volleyball sports hall is within the park.
Some sources suggest that the name derives from the term 'za breg(om)' or 'beyond the hill'.
Zagreb is home to numerous sports and recreational centers.
The old location, 2 St. Catherine's Square, is part of the Kulmer Palace in the Gornji Grad.
made there performances around the clubs and concert halls of Zagreb.
Zagreb is also the Episcopal see of the Metropolitanate of Zagreb and Ljubljana of the Serbian Orthodox Church.
The City Assembly is the representative body of the citizens of the City of Zagreb elected for a four-year term on the basis of universal suffrage in direct elections by secret ballot using proportional system with d'Hondt method in a manner specified by law.
The city also expanded westward and eastward, incorporating Dubrava, Podsused, Jarun, Blato and other settlements.
The same census records around 55,000 residents belonging to ethnic minorities: 17,526 Serbs (2.22%), 8,119 Bosniaks (1.03%), 4,292 Albanians (0.54%), 2,755 Romani (0.35%), 2,132 Slovenes (0.27%), 1,194 Macedonians (0.15%), 1,191 Montenegrins (0.15%), and a number of other smaller communities.
It's a great opportunity for all visitors to take photographs of authentic and fully functional historical replicas of medieval armour.
The history of Zagreb dates as far back as 1094 A.D. when the Hungarian King Ladislaus, returning from his campaign against Croatia, founded a diocese.
According to another old legend, a city governor was thirsty and ordered a girl named Manda to take water from Manduševac well (nowadays a fountain in Ban Jelačić Square), using the sentence: "Zagrabi, Mando!"
Today the latter is Zagreb's Upper Town (Gornji Grad) and is one of the best preserved urban nuclei in Croatia.
It is part of a significant Green Zone, which passes from Medvednica Mountains in the north toward the south.
Skiers visit Sljeme, which has four ski-runs, three ski-lifts and a chairlift.
As of May 2015, the average monthly net salary in Zagreb was 6,669 kuna, about €870 (Croatian average is 5,679 kuna, about €740).
The oldest settlement located in the vicinity of the city was the Roman Andautonia, in today's Ščitarjevo.
The most important branches of industry are: production of electrical machines and devices, chemical, pharmaceutical, textile, food and drink processing.
The The Strossmayer Gallery of Old Masters (11 Zrinski Square) offers permanent holdings presenting European paintings from the 14th to 19th centuries, and the Ivan Meštrović Studio, (8 Mletačka Street) with sculptures, drawings, lithography portfolios and other items, was a donation of this great artist to his homeland The Museum and Gallery Center (4 Jesuit Square) introduces on various occasions the Croatian and foreign cultural and artistic heritage.
The first tram line was opened on 5 September 1891 and trams have been serving as a vital component of Zagreb mass transit ever since.
Almost all of the largest Croatian companies, media and scientific institutions have their headquarters in the city.
The city has an extensive avenue network with numerous main arteries up to ten lanes wide and Zagreb bypass, a congested four-lane highway encircling most of the city.
The Sava and the Kupa valleys are to the south of Zagreb, and the region of Hrvatsko Zagorje is located on the other (northern) side of the Medvednica hill.
Zagreb is an international trade and business centre, as well as an essential transport hub placed at the crossroads of Central Europe, the Mediterranean and the Southeast Europe.
Zagreb is also home of many others club festivals like Žedno uho where many of indie, rock, metal and electronica artists like Animal Collective, Melvins, Butthole Surfers, Crippled Black Phoenix, NoMeansNo, The National (band), Mark Lanegan, Swans (band), Mudhoney etc.
The stadium is part of the immense Svetice recreational and sports complex (ŠRC Svetice), south of the Maksimir Park.
The complex covers an area of .
The historic district can be reached on foot, starting from Jelačić Square, the center of Zagreb, or by a funicular on nearby Tomićeva Street.
'''Modern Gallery''' () holds the most important and comprehensive collection of paintings, sculptures and drawings by 19th- and 20th-century Croatian artists.
Skaters can skate in the skating rink on Trg Sportova (Sports Square) and on the lake Jarun Skaters' park.
During the 17th and 18th centuries, Zagreb was badly devastated by fire and the plague.
File:Mirogoj Cemetery 2015 2.JPG|Mirogoj Cemetery|alt=
Temperatures rise above  on an average 14.6 days each summer.
Sports and Recreational Center Šalata, located in Šalata, only a couple hundred meters from the Jelačić Square, is most attractive for tennis players.
This link will be standard-gauge and tie in with normal Croatian Railways operations.
'''Croatian Museum of Naïve Art''' (works by Croatian primitivists at 3 Ćirilometodska Street) is one of the first museums of naïve art in the world.
Zagreb is a city with a rich history dating from the Roman times to the present day.
Founded in 1669, the University of Zagreb is the oldest continuously operating university in Croatia and one of the largest  and oldest universities in the Southeastern Europe.
In today's German though, "Zagreb" prevails.
The most famous are the Egyptian collection, the Zagreb mummy and bandages with the oldest Etruscan inscription in the world (''Liber Linteus Zagrabiensis''), as well as the numismatic collection.
It is also the seat of the Zagreb County which encircles Zagreb.
which means, ''Scoop it up, Manda!
This bustling core hosts many imposing buildings, monuments, and parks as well as a multitude of museums, theatres and cinemas.
, the University of Zagreb is ranked among 500 Best Universities of the world by the  Shanghai Academic Ranking of World Universities.
As such, Zagreb performs self-governing public affairs of both city and county.
The most renowned concert hall named "Vatroslav Lisinski", after the composer of the first Croatian opera, was built in 1973.
Domestic products which deserve to be tasted include turkey, duck or goose with ''mlinci'' (a kind of pasta), ''štrukli'' (cottage cheese strudel), ''sir i vrhnje'' (cottage cheese with cream), ''kremšnite'' (custard slices in flaky pastry), and ''orehnjača'' (traditional walnut roll).
The city administrative bodies are managed by the principals (appointed by the mayor for a four-year term of office, may be appointed again to the same duty).
''Animafest'', the World Festival of Animated Films, takes place every even-numbered year, and the ''Music Biennale'', the international festival of avant-garde music, every odd-numbered year.
In 2012 a total of 675 707 tourists  visited the city.
The '''Museum of Contemporary Art''' was founded in 1954.
'''Museum of the City of Zagreb''' (20 Opatička Street) was established in 1907 by the Association of the Braća Hrvatskog Zmaja.
Dom Sportova, a sport center in northern Trešnjevka features six halls.
Almost all of the largest Croatian as well as Central European companies and conglomerates such as Agrokor, INA, Hrvatski Telekom have their headquarters in the city.
The oldest settlement located near today's Zagreb was a Roman town of Andautonia, now Šćitarjevo, which existed between the 1st and the 5th century AD.
Outdoor ice skating is a popular winter recreation.
Two additional bridges across the river Sava are proposed: Jarun Bridge and Bundek Bridge.
There are also several fine restaurants within and near the center.
Alongside the bishop's see, the canonical settlement Kaptol developed north of Zagreb Cathedral, as did the fortified settlement Gradec on the neighbouring hill; the border between the two being the Medveščak stream.
Its sports and recreation opportunities include swimming, sunbathing, waterskiing, angling and other water sports, but also beach volleyball, football, basketball, handball, table tennis, and mini-golf.
Traffic jams and daytime parking space are a great problem in the wider city centre area during the rush hour.
The location had been used prior to the 1970s, but then went to neglect until 2006 when it was renovated.
It is located in a late 19th-century neo-Renaissance palace.
The airport is also the main Croatian airbase featuring a fighter squadron, helicopters, as well as military and freight transport aircraft.
The idea of digging or unearthing is supported by scientists who suggest that the settlement was established beyond a water-filled hole or ''graba'' and that the name derives from this.
The stage on Opatovina hosts the ''Zagreb Histrionic Summer'' theater events.
Zagreb has four separate seasons.
The wider Zagreb metropolitan area includes the City of Zagreb and the separate Zagreb County bringing the total metropolitan area population up to 1,237,887.
The other block offers multipurpose sports facilities: apart from tennis courts, there are handball, basketball and indoor football grounds, as well as track and field facilities, a bocci ball alley and table tennis opportunities.
As a sign of gratitude for offering him a safe haven from the Tatars the Croatian and Hungarian King Bela IV bestowed Gradec with a Golden Bull, which offered its citizens exemption from county rule and autonomy, as well as its own judicial system.
The previous narrow-gauge line to Samobor called ''Samoborček'' was closed in the 1970s.
The first half of the 20th century saw a considerable expansion of Zagreb.
The museum holdings consist of almost 2000 works of art – paintings, sculptures, drawings and prints, mainly by Croatians but also by other well-known world artists.
The Museum of Broken Relationships at 2 Ćirilometodska holds people's mementos of past relationships.
In early 2010, numerous transport companies have been allowed to enter the market; consequently the prices significantly dropped whereas the service was immensely improved so the popularity of taxis in Zagreb has been increasing from then onwards.
The World Center "Wonder of Croatian Naïve Art" (12 Ban Jelačić Square) exhibits masterpieces of Croatian naïve art as well as the works of a new generation of artists.
34% of companies in Croatia have headquarters in Zagreb, and 38.4% of the Croatian workforce works in Zagreb, including almost all banks, utility and public transport companies.
The busiest roads are the main east-west arteries, former Highway "Brotherhood and Unity", consisting of Ljubljanska Avenue, Zagrebačka Avenue and Slavonska Avenue; and the Vukovarska Avenue, the closest bypass of the city centre.
The hill may well have been the river bank of the River Sava (the modern Croatian word "breg" or "brijeg", meaning "hill", originally meant "river bank"), which is believed to have previously flowed closer to the city centre.
There are several lodging villages, offering accommodation and restaurants for hikers.
The data in column 3 refers to the population in the city borders as of the census in question.
There are about 20 permanent or seasonal theaters and stages.
'''Other museums and galleries'''
The proximity of strong seismic sources presents a real danger of strong earthquakes.
It also hosts the annual ''ZagrebDox'' documentary film festival.
Zagreb is the most important transport hub in Croatia where Central Europe, the Mediterranean and Southeast Europe meet, making the Zagreb area the centre of the road, rail and air networks of Croatia.
Islamic religious organisation of Croatia has the see in Zagreb.
The first comprises a tennis center situated in a large tennis hall with four courts.
The term of office of the mayor (and his/her deputies) is four years.
It is located in a restored monumental complex (Popov toranj, the Observatory, Zakmardi Granary) of the former Convent of the Poor Clares, of 1650.
After the mid-1950s, construction of new residential areas south of the Sava river began, resulting in Novi Zagreb (Croatian for ''New Zagreb''), originally called "Južni Zagreb" (Southern Zagreb).
It is a city known for its diverse economy, high quality of living, museums, sporting and entertainment events.
An urbanised area connects Zagreb with the surrounding towns of Zaprešić, Samobor, Dugo Selo and Velika Gorica.
The city extends over  east-west and around  north-south.
The Dražen Petrović Basketball Hall seats 5,400 people.
Each Saturday, (from April till the end of September), on St. Mark's Square in the Upper town, tourists can meet members of the Order of The Silver Dragon (Red Srebrnog Zmaja), who reenact famous historical conflicts between Gradec and Kaptol.
File:Hotel Esplanade, Zagreb, Croacia, 2014-04-13, DD 01.JPG|Hotel Esplanade|alt=
The mayor (with the deputies) may be recalled by a referendum according to law (not less than 20% of all electors in the City of Zagreb has the right to initiate a city referendum regarding recalling of the mayor; when a majority of voters taking part in the referendum vote in favour of the recall, provided that majority includes not less than one third of all persons entitled to vote in the City of Zagreb, i.e.
The Museum deals with topics from the cultural, artistic, economic and political history of the city spanning from Roman finds to the modern period.
The 38,923-seat Maksimir Stadium, last 10 years under renovation, is located in Maksimir in the northeastern part of the city.
In 1776, the royal council (government) moved from Varaždin to Zagreb and during the reign of Joseph II Zagreb became the headquarters of the Varaždin and Karlovac general command.
Zagreb is also a home of the INmusic festival, one of the biggest open air festivals in Croatia which is being held every year, usually at the end of June.
It is located in the northwest of the country, along the Sava river, at the southern slopes of the Medvednica mountain.
Highest recorded temperature ever was  in July 1950, and lowest was  in February 1956.
Sesvete was the first and the closest area to become a part of the agglomeration and is already included in the City of Zagreb for administrative purposes and now forms the easternmost city district.
Mainstream Protestant churches have also been present in Zagreb – Evangelical (Lutheran) Church and Reformed Christian (Calvinist) Church.
The transport connections, concentration of industry, scientific and research institutions and industrial tradition underlie its leading economic position in Croatia.
Lučko used to be the main airport of Zagreb from 1947 to 1959.
Zagreb is also the host of ''Zagrebfest'', the oldest Croatian pop-music festival, as well as of several traditional international sports events and tournaments.
The City Assembly Professional Service is managed by the secretary of the City Assembly (appointed by the Assembly).
Forming a part of the Corridor Vb, highway A4 starts in Zagreb forming the northeastern wing of the Zagreb bypass and leads to Hungary until the Goričan border crossing.
The Catholic Church is the largest religious organisation in Zagreb, Catholicism being the predominant religion of Croatia, with over 1.1 million adherents.
With its 160,000 exhibits, the Arts and Crafts Museum is a national-level museum for artistic production and the history of material culture in Croatia.
The city was liberated by the Partisans at the end of the war.
The city administration bodies are the '''Zagreb''' '''City Assembly''' (''Gradska skupština'') as the representative body and the '''mayor of Zagreb''' (''gradonačelnik Zagreba'') who is the executive head of the city.
Zagreb has 136 primary schools and 100 secondary schools including 30 gymnasia.
The A1 starts at the Lučko interchange and concurs with the A6 up to the Bosiljevo 2 interchange, connecting Zagreb and Split ( Vrgorac).
During Austria-Hungary, Zagreb was more commonly known outside Croatia by its Austrian German exonym "Agram".
Prior to 2009, the mayor was elected by the City Assembly.
Croatian Chief of Office of Emergency Management Pavle Kalinić stated Zagreb experiences around 400 earthquakes a year, most of them being imperceptible.
The Art Pavilion (22 King Tomislav Square) by Viennese architects Hellmer and Fellmer who were the most famous designers of theaters in Central Europe is a neo-classical exhibition complex and one of the landmarks of the downtown.
Zagreb also has a second, smaller airport, Lučko .
This has enhanced the commuting opportunities across the city.
ŠRC Svetice, together with Maksimir Park, creates an ideal connection of areas which are assigned to sport, recreation and leisure.
Local government is organized in 17 city districts (or city borroughs) represented by City District Councils.
There are many interesting things for tourists in Zagreb, for example, the two statues of Saint George, one at the Marshal Tito Square, the other at Kamenita vrata, where the image of Virgin Mary is said to be only thing that hasn't burned in the 17th-century fire.
In total there are around 40 non-Catholic religious organizations and denominations in Zagreb with their headquarters and places of worship across the city making it a large and diverse multicultural community.
The holdings comprise over 80,000 items arranged systematically into collections of artistic and mundane objects characteristic of the city and its history.
In 1851 Zagreb had its first mayor, Janko Kamauf, and in 1945 it was made the capital of Croatia when the demographic boom and the urban sprawl made the city as it is known today.
During the 1991–1995 Croatian War of Independence, it was a scene of some sporadic fighting surrounding its JNA army barracks, but escaped major damage.
Highway A3 (formerly named Bratstvo i jedinstvo) was the showpiece of Croatia in the SFRY.
After Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia, Zagreb was proclaimed its capital.
The ''Day of the City of Zagreb'' on 16 November is celebrated every year with special festivities, especially on the Jarun lake in the southwestern part of the city.
Its new building hosts a rich collection of Croatian and international contemporary visual art which has been collected throughout the decades from the nineteen-fifties till today.
Its main branches of economy are high-tech industries and the service sector.
The commuter rail network in Zagreb has existed since 1992.
Before World War I, the city expanded and neighborhoods like Stara Peščenica in the east and Črnomerec in the west were created.
The museum holds works of Croatian naïve expression of the 20th century.
Gradec and Zagreb were united in 1851 by ban Josip Jelačić, who was credited for this, with the naming the main city square, Ban Jelačić Square in his honour.
The Croatian National Theater in Zagreb was built in 1895 and opened by emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria.
The Modern Gallery (1 Hebrangova Street) comprises all relevant fine artists of the 19th and 20th centuries.
It comprises a big tennis court and eight smaller ones, two of which are covered by the so-called "balloon", and another two equipped with lights.
Zagreb lies at an elevation of approximately  above sea level.
Hippodrome Zagreb offers recreational horseback riding opportunities, while horse races are held every weekend during the warmer part of the year.
A new link to the nearby town of Samobor has been announced and is due to start construction in 2014.
This center is used for basketball, handball, volleyball, hockey, gymnastics, tennis, etc.
Both settlements came under Tatar attack in 1242.
The only Croatian stock exchange is the Zagreb Stock Exchange (), which is located in Eurotower, one of the tallest Croatian skyscrapers.
The upgrade coincided with the opening of the bridge over the Mura river on the A4 and the completion of the Hungarian M7, which marked the opening of the first freeway corridor between Rijeka and Budapest.
Zagreb's offerings include crystal, china and ceramics, wicker or straw baskets, and top-quality Croatian wines and gastronomic products.
The largest industrial zone (Žitnjak) in the south-eastern part of the city represents an extension of the industrial zones on the eastern outskirts of the city, between the Sava and the Prigorje region.
Some of the most notable sport clubs in Zagreb are: NK Dinamo Zagreb, KHL Medveščak Zagreb, RK Zagreb, KK Cibona, KK Zagreb, KK Cedevita, NK Zagreb, HAVK Mladost and others.
The largest two have seating capacity of 5,000 and 3,100 people, respectively.
Zagreb occasionally experiences earthquakes, due to the proximity of Žumberak-Medvednica fault zone.
The first horse-drawn tram was used in 1891.
In 1926, the first radio station in the region began broadcasting out of Zagreb, and in 1947 the Zagreb Fair was opened.
The area between the railway and the Sava river witnessed a new construction boom after World War II.
Most people don't know what the statue "Prizemljeno Sunce" (The Grounded Sun) is for, and just scrawl graffiti or signatures on it, but it's actually the Sun scaled down, with many planets situated all over Zagreb in scale with the Sun.
'''Arts and Crafts Museum''' (10 Marshal Tito Square) was founded in 1880 with the intention of preserving the works of art and craft against the new predominance of industrial products.
These are the remains, stone weapons and tools of prehistoric ''Krapina man''.
The historical part of the city to the north of Ban Jelačić Square is composed of the Gornji Grad and Kaptol, a medieval urban complex of churches, palaces, museums, galleries and government buildings that are popular with tourists on sightseeing tours.
In mid-January 2005, Sljeme held its first World Ski Championship tournament.
Zagreb is an important tourist center, not only in terms of passengers traveling from the rest of Europe to the Adriatic Sea, but also as a travel destination itself.
Arena Zagreb was finished in 2008.
The old Medvedgrad, a recently restored medieval burg was built in the 13th century on Medvednica hill.
In the summer, theater performances and concerts, mostly in the Upper Town, are organized either indoors or outdoors.
The holdings comprise 3,750 works of art of various techniques and materials, and different cultures and civilizations.
The average daily mean temperature in winter is around +1&nbsp;°C (from December to February) and the average temperature in summer is .
Recreational swimmers can enjoy a smaller-size indoor swimming pool in Daničićeva Street, and a newly opened indoor Olympic-size pool at Utrine sports center in Novi Zagreb.
Sports Park Mladost, situated on the embankment of the Sava river, has an Olympic-size swimming pool, smaller indoor and outdoor swimming pools, a sunbathing terrace, 16 tennis courts as well as basketball, volleyball, handball, football and field hockey courts.
'''Mimara Museum''' (5 Roosevelt Square) was founded with a donation from Ante "Mimara" Topić and opened to the public in 1987.
In the last official census of 2011 the population of the City of Zagreb was 792,875.
There used to be a mosque in the Meštrović Pavilion during World War II  at the Žrtava Fašizma Square, but it was relocated to the neighborhood of Borovje in Peščenica.
The record number of tourists visited Zagreb in 2015.
Finding a parking space is supposed to be made somewhat easier by the construction of new underground multi-story parking lots (Importanne Center, Importanne Gallery, Lang Square, Tuškanac, Kvaternik Square, Klaić Street, etc.).
The ''Festival of the Zagreb Philharmonic'' and the flowers exhibition ''Floraart'' (end of May or beginning of June), the ''Old-timer Rally'' annual events.
Residents of districts elect members of councils.
These holdings include evidence of Croatian presence in the area.
This is mostly recognized because of the city's location, and its good traffic relations with other neighbouring European capital cities such as Vienna and Budapest.
'''Ethnographic Museum''' (14 Ivan Mažuranić Square) was founded in 1919.
The museum is located in the center of Novi Zagreb, opened in 2009.
Current president is Mufti Aziz Hasanović.
In 2010 more than 600,000 tourists visited the city, with a 10% increase seen in 2011.
Numerous shops, boutiques, store houses and shopping centers offer a variety of quality clothing.
It was changed to direct elections by majoritarian vote (two-round system) in 2009.
