In 2012, Zambia won the African Cup of Nations for the first time after losing in the final twice.
Holding office for only three years, Banda stepped down after his defeat in the 2011 elections by Patriotic Front party leader Michael Sata.
The flood dominates the natural environment and the lives, society and culture of the inhabitants and those of other smaller, floodplains throughout the country.
An estimated 757 bird species are known to exist, of which 600 are either resident or afrotropic migrants; 470 breed in the country; and 100 are non-breding migrants.
The music which inroduced dance is part of their cultural expression and it embodies the beauty and spectacle of life in Zambia, from the intricacies of the talking drums to the ''Kamangu'' drum used to announce the beginning of ''Malaila'' traditional ceremony.
The tax hike and public sector wage freeze prohibited salary increases and new hires.
They are about 500 people who belong to the Ahmadiyya sect .
In 2007 Zambia recorded its ninth consecutive year of economic growth.
Zambia has since revoked its bid to host the 2011 All-Africa Games, citing a lack of funds.
The most prominent of these was David Livingstone, who had a vision of ending the slave trade through the "3 Cs": Christianity, Commerce and Civilization.
The Zambezi valley, running along the southern border, is both deep and wide.
Eastern Zambia shows great diversity.
During the 19th century, the Ngoni and Sotho peoples arrived from the south.
The north of Zambia is very flat with broad plains.
The economy stagnated until the late 1990s.
The Lusaka stadium would have a capacity of 70,000 spectators while the other two stadiums would hold 50,000 people each.
Additionally, Adult Literacy programmes are available for semi-literate and illiterate individuals.
The federation was dissolved on 31 December 1963, and in January 1964, Kaunda won the only election for Prime Minister of Northern Rhodesia.
Zambeef operates eight abattoirs, four farms and numerous retail stores (also in co-operation with Shoprite) and a fast-food chain (ZamChick Inn) throughout the country.
Roughly 490 known fish species, belonging to 24 fish families have been reported in Zambia, with Lake Tanganyika having the highest diverse and endemic species.
Zambia's population in November 2010 was 13,092,666.
These plateau areas of northern Zambia have been categorised by the World Wildlife Fund as a large section of the Central Zambezian Miombo woodlands ecoregion.
Hills and mountains are found by the side of some sections of the valley, notably in its north-east the Nyika Plateau () on the Malawi border, which extend into Zambia as the Mafinga Hills, containing the country's highest point, Mafinga Central ().
Originally inhabited by Khoisan peoples, the region was affected by the Bantu expansion of the thirteenth century.
Zambia turned to foreign and international lenders for relief, but, as copper prices remained depressed, it became increasingly difficult to service its growing debt.
About three-fourths of the population is Protestant while about 20% follow Roman Catholicism.
The new name of Zambia was derived from the Zambezi river (Zambezi may mean "River of God").
Many protesters were killed by the regime in breakthrough June 1990 protests.
Two of the Zambezi's longest and largest tributaries, the Kafue and the Luangwa, flow mainly in Zambia.
Despite this, in 1996, Zambia was ranked 15th on the official FIFA World Football Team rankings, the highest attained by any southern African team.
Initially, Zambia hoped to reach the HIPC completion point, and benefit from substantial debt forgiveness, in late 2003.
After independence in 1964 the foreign relations of Zambia were mostly focused on supporting liberation movements in other countries in Southern Africa, such as the African National Congress and SWAPO.
Bemba and Nyanja are spoken in the urban areas in addition to other indigenous languages which are commonly spoken in Zambia.
The town of Livingstone, near the Falls, is named after him.
By the late 1970s, Mozambique and Angola had attained independence from Portugal.
Levy Mwanawasa, Chiluba's chosen successor, presided over Zambia from January 2002 until his death in August 2008, and is credited with campaigns to reduce corruption and increase the standard of living.
Zambia is a landlocked country in southern Africa, with a tropical climate, and consists mostly of high plateaus with some hills and mountains, dissected by river valleys.
A railway (TAZARA – Tanzania Zambia Railways) to the Tanzanian port of Dar es Salaam, completed in 1975 with Chinese assistance, reduced Zambian dependence on railway lines south to South Africa and west through an increasingly troubled Portuguese Angola.
The Zambian economy has historically been based on the copper mining industry.
According to the ''World Refugee Survey 2009'' published by the US Committee for Refugees and Immigrants, Zambia had a population of refugees and asylum seekers numbering approximately 88,900.
According to UNICEF, 45% of children under five years are stunted.
The average altitude of 1200 m generally has a moderate climate.
In 1923, the BSA Company ceded control of Northern Rhodesia to the British Government after the government decided not to renew the Company's charter.
Urban dwellers sometimes differentiate between urban and rural dialects of the same language by prefixing the rural languages with 'deep'.
Zambia faces a generalised HIV epidemic, with an estimated prevalence rate of 13.5% among adults (ages 15–49) in 2009.
One of the results of the colonial era was the growth of urbanisation.
In an effort to reach HIPC completion in 2004, the government drafted an austerity budget for 2004, freezing civil service salaries and increasing a number of taxes.
The Ministry of Education effectively oversees the provision of quality education through policy and regulation of the education curriculum.
Improvements in the world copper market have magnified the effect of this volume increase on revenues and foreign exchange earnings.
9 other candidates all got less than 1% each.
English is used in official communications and is the language of choice at home among&nbsp;– now common&nbsp;– intertribal families.
During the Cold War Zambia was a member of the Non-Aligned Movement.
Much of its growth is due to foreign investment in mining and to higher world copper prices.
These grew, adjusted and prospered from the original missionary settlements (Portuguese and Catholicism in the east from Mozambique) and Anglicanism (British influences) from the south.
The Ministry of Health (MOH) provides information pertaining to Zambian health.
At  it is the 39th-largest country in the world, slightly smaller than Chile.
Beginning in May 2008, the number of Zimbabweans in Zambia also began to increase significantly; the influx consisted largely of Zimbabweans formerly living in South Africa who were fleeing xenophobic violence there.
In the mid-1970s, the price of copper, Zambia's principal export, suffered a severe decline worldwide.
Kaunda's socialist United National Independence Party (UNIP) maintained power from 1964 until 1991.
The country lies mostly between latitudes 8° and 18°S, and longitudes 22° and 34°E.
Popular traditional arts are mainly in pottery, basketry (such as Tonga baskets), stools, fabrics, mats, wooden carvings, ivory carvings, wire craft and copper crafts.
Northern Rhodesia became the Republic of Zambia on 24 October 1964, with Kenneth Kaunda as the first president.
The Benguela railway, which extended west through Angola, was essentially closed to Zambian traffic by the late 1970s.
Notably, at one point in the early 2000s, the Australia and South Africa national rugby teams were captained by players born in the same Lusaka hospital, George Gregan and Corné Krige.
Black Africans were not counted in all six census exercises—conducted in 1911, 1921, 1931, 1946, 1951, and 1956—prior to independence.
Zambia is one of the most highly urbanised countries in sub-Saharan Africa with 44% of the population concentrated in a few urban areas along the major transport corridors, while rural areas are sparsely populated.
Zambia also produced the first black African (Madalitso Muthiya) to play in the United States Golf Open, one of the four major golf tournaments.
The Education Act of 2011 regulates the provision of equal and quality education.
There are two main seasons, the rainy season (November to April) corresponding to summer, and the dry season (May/June to October/November), corresponding to winter.
The fossil skull remains of Broken Hill Man, dated between 300,000 and 125,000 years BC, further shows that the area was inhabited by pre-historic man.
This initiative seeks to exploit other components of Zambia's rich resource base by promoting agriculture, tourism, gemstone mining, and hydro-power.
The William Mmutle Masetlha Foundation run by the Baha'i community is particularly active in areas such as literacy and primary health care.
In the urban areas foreign genres of music are popular, in particular Congolese rumba, African-American music and Jamaican reggae.
In 1990 Kaunda survived an attempted coup, and in 1991 he agreed to reinstate multiparty democracy, having instituted one party rule under the Choma Commission of 1972.
The Zambian government is pursuing an economic diversification program to reduce the economy's reliance on the copper industry.
During the country's occupation by the British, between 1911 and 1963, the country attracted immigrants from Europe and the Indian subcontinent, the latter whom came specifically as labourers.
Football is the most popular sport in Zambia, and the Zambia national football team has had its triumphant moments in football history.
In the west the most notable being the Barotse Floodplain on the Zambezi, which floods from December to June, lagging behind the annual rainy season (typically November to April).
Zambia is significantly ethnically diverse, with a total of 73 ethnic tribes.
From 1972 to 1991 Zambia was a one-party state with the UNIP as the sole legal political party under the motto "One Zambia, One Nation".
The edge of the Cuando River floodplain (not its main channel) forms Zambia's southwestern border, and via the Chobe River that river contributes very little water to the Zambezi because most is lost by evaporation.
In the Köppen climate classification, most of the country is classified as humid subtropical or tropical wet and dry, with small stretches of semi-arid steppe climate in the south-west and along the Zambezi valley.
Kaunda played a key role in regional diplomacy, cooperating closely with the United States in search of solutions to conflicts in Rhodesia (Zimbabwe), Angola, and Namibia.
These include Lozi, Kaonde, Tonga, Lunda and Luvale, which feature on the Zambia National Broadcasting Corporation (ZNBC)'s local languages section.
There is also a small Jewish community, composed mostly of Ashkenazis.
The southernmost headstream of the Congo River rises in Zambia and flows west through its northern area firstly as the Chambeshi and then, after the Bangweulu Swamps as the Luapula, which forms part of the border with the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
French is commonly studied in private schools, while some secondary schools have it as an optional subject.
In 2009, Zambia has been badly hit by the world economic crisis.
He described them thus: "Scenes so lovely must have been gazed upon by angels in their flight".
There are very few hospitals in rural or remote places in Zambia, where most communities rely on small government-run community health centres and rural health posts.
The original cultures have largely survived in the rural areas.
Hence, Mozambique took Zambia's place as host.
The Northern and North-Western parts of the country especially have the highest diversity of flowering plants.
The country's rate of economic growth cannot support rapid population growth or the strain which HIV/AIDS-related issues place on the economy.
In 2009, Zambia generated 10.3 Twh and has been rated high in use of both Solar power and Hydroelectricity.
Presently, Zambia averages between $7 billion and $8 billion of exports annually.
Zambia has also strangely provided a shinty international, Zambian-born Eddie Tembo representing Scotland in the compromise rules Shinty/Hurling game against Ireland in 2008.
On 24 January 2015 it was announced that Edgar Chagwa Lungu had won the election to become the 6th President  in a tightly contested race.
The Zambian barbet is a well-known species endemic to Zambia.
Unemployment and underemployment in urban areas are serious problems.
In Zambia the number of midwives per 1,000 live births is 5 and the lifetime risk of death for pregnant women is 1 in 38.
Social indicators continue to decline, particularly in measurements of life expectancy at birth (about 40.9 years) and maternal mortality (830 per 100,000 pregnancies).
With membership above 1,200,000 the Zambia district of the church is the third largest after Congo East and East Africa (Nairobi).
The process of urbanisation has had a dramatic effect on some of the indigenous languages, including the assimilation of words from other indigenous languages and English.
On 24 October 1964, Zambia became independent of the United Kingdom and prime minister Kenneth Kaunda became the inaugural president.
Zambia is officially a Christian nation according to the 1996 constitution, but a wide variety of religious traditions exist.
In January 2003, the Zambian government informed the International Monetary Fund and World Bank that it wished to renegotiate some of the agreed performance criteria calling for privatisation of the Zambia National Commercial Bank and the national telephone and electricity utilities.
After Frederick Chiluba (a Pentecostal Christian) became President in 1991, Pentecostal congregations expanded considerably around the country.
The socialist regime made up for falling revenue with several abortive attempts at International Monetary Fund structural adjustment programmes (SAPs).
Zambia's culture has been an integral part of their development post independence such as the uprising of cultural villages and private museums.
The expedition was from then on led by his friend Francisco Pinto.
Rugby Union, boxing and cricket are also popular sports in Zambia.
At independence, despite its considerable mineral wealth, Zambia faced major challenges.
Zambia fell into poverty after international copper prices declined in the 1970s.
In Zambia's situation, the cost of transporting the copper great distances to market was an additional strain.
The official language of Zambia is English, which is used to conduct official business and is the medium of instruction in schools.
Before its confluence, the Luangwa River forms part of Zambia's border with Mozambique.
Different ethnic groups started living together in towns and cities, influencing each other as well as adopting a lot of the European culture.
Approximately 1% of the population are Muslims, most of whom live in urban areas and play a large economic role in the country,.
The Kariba hydroelectric station on the Zambezi River provided sufficient capacity to satisfy the country's requirements for electricity, despite Rhodesian management.
A very small area in the northeast forms part of the internal drainage basin of Lake Rukwa in Tanzania.
The Muchinga Mountains, the watershed between the Zambezi and Congo drainage basins, run parallel to the deep valley of the Luangwa River and form a sharp backdrop to its northern edge, although they are almost everywhere below .
The population is concentrated mainly around Lusaka in the south and the Copperbelt Province to the northwest, the core economic hubs of the country.
With 73 ethnic groups, there are also a myriad of traditional ceremonies that take place every year.
Kalusha Bwalya, Zambia's most celebrated football player and one of Africa's greatest football players in history had a hat trick in that match.
The bureaucratic procedures surrounding the process of obtaining licences encourages the widespread use of facilitation payments.
The Tazama oil pipeline was also built from Dar es Salaam to Ndola in Zambia.
Several psychedelic rock artists emerged in the 1970s to create a genre known as Zam-rock, including WITCH, Musi-O-Tunya, Rikki Ililonga, Amanaz, the Peace, Chrissy Zebby Tembo, Blackfoot, and the Ngozi Family.
Kaunda was succeeded by Frederick Chiluba of the social-democratic Movement for Multi-Party Democracy in 1991, beginning a period of social-economic growth and government decentralisation.
He was the first European to see the magnificent waterfalls on the Zambezi River in 1855, naming them the Victoria Falls after Queen Victoria.
In 2010, public expenditure on health was 3.4% of GDP, among the lowest in southern Africa.
The Colonial Governor, Sir Evelyn Hone, was very close to Kaunda and urged him to stand for the post.
The Zambezi falls about  over the  wide Victoria Falls, located in the south-west corner of the country, subsequently flowing into Lake Kariba.
Locally the falls are known as "Mosi-o-Tunya" or "thundering smoke" in the Lozi or Kololo dialect.
Zambia's support for anti-apartheid movements such as the African National Congress (ANC) also created security problems as the South African Defence Force struck at dissident targets during external raids.
North-Eastern Rhodesia and Barotziland-North-Western Rhodesia were administered as separate units until 1911 when they were merged to form Northern Rhodesia, a British protectorate.
In the early 19th century, the Nsokolo people settled in the Mbala district of Northern Province.
This continuous evolution of languages has led to Zambian slang which can be heard in daily life throughout Lusaka and other major cities.
Dance as a practice serves as a unifying factor bringing the people together as one.
The 2014 CIA estimated average life expectancy in Zambia was 51.83 years.
About 68% of Zambians live below the recognised national poverty line, with rural poverty rates standing at about 78% and urban rates at about 53%.
In 1924, after negotiations, administration of Northern Rhodesia transferred to the British Colonial Office.
In 1953, the creation of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland grouped together Northern Rhodesia, Southern Rhodesia and Nyasaland (now Malawi) as a single semi-autonomous region.
Zambia is located on the plateau of Central Africa, between 1000–1600 m above sea level.
Most Zambian traditional music is based on drums (and other percussion instruments) with a lot of singing and dancing.
They beat Côte d'Ivoire 8–7 in a penalty shoot-out in the final, which was played in Libreville, just a few kilometres away from the plane crash 19 years previously.
By the late 19th century, most of the various peoples of Zambia were established in their current areas.
After Sata's death, Vice President Guy Scott, a Zambian of Scottish descent, became acting President of Zambia.
The policy of not trading through the main supply route and line of rail to the sea&nbsp;– the territory known as Rhodesia (from 1965 to 1979), and now known as Zimbabwe&nbsp;– cost the economy greatly.
Domestically, there were few trained and educated Zambians capable of running the government, and the economy was largely dependent on foreign expertise.
Civil strife in both Portuguese colonies and a mounting Namibian War of Independence resulted in an influx of refugees and compounded transportation issues.
However, to this day, many pundits say the greatest team Zambia has ever assembled was the one that perished on 28 April 1993 in a plane crash at Libreville, Gabon.
Initially, Harry Nkumbula's African National Congress (ANC) led the campaign, which Kenneth Kaunda's United National Independence Party (UNIP) subsequently took up.
While most Europeans left after the collapse of white minority rule, a fair number of Asians still remain.
Expatriates, mostly British or South African, as well as some white Zambian citizens, live mainly in Lusaka and in the Copperbelt in northern Zambia, where they are either employed in mines, financial and related activities or retired.
In 2003, exports of nonmetals increased by 25% and accounted for 38% of all export earnings, previously 35%.
However, as of early 2015 Zambia began experiencing a serious energy shortage due to the poor 2014/2015 rain season which resulted in low water levels at the Kariba dam and other major dams.
In the 2000s, the economy stabilized, attaining single-digit inflation in 2006–2007, real GDP growth, decreasing interest rates, and increasing levels of trade.
Zambia has some of nature's best wildlife and game reserves affording the country with abundant tourism potential.
The Luapula flows south then west before it turns north until it enters Lake Mweru.
Guy Scott served briefly as interim president until new elections were held on 20 January 2015, in which Edgar Lungu was elected as the sixth President.
He won 48.33% of the vote, a lead of 1.66% over his closest rival, Hakainde Hichilema, with 46.67%.
In 1888, the British South Africa Company (BSA Company), led by Cecil Rhodes, obtained mineral rights from the Litunga, the Paramount Chief of the Lozi (Ba-rotse) for the area which later became Barotziland-North-Western Rhodesia.
The 2010 maternal mortality rate per 100,000 births for Zambia is 470.
In the 2010 population census, 98.2% were Black Africans and the remaining 1.8% consisting of other major racial groups.
Northern Rhodesia was the centre of much of the turmoil and crisis characterising the federation in its last years.
The border of the Congo Pedicle was drawn around this mountain.
The North Luangwa, South Luangwa and Kafue National Parks have one of the most prolific animal populations in Africa.
A German course has been introduced at the University of Zambia (UNZA).
However, average monthly temperatures remain above  over most of the country for eight or more months of the year.
In 1895, Rhodes asked his American scout Frederick Russell Burnham to look for minerals and ways to improve river navigation in the region, and it was during this trek that Burnham discovered major copper deposits along the Kafue River.
After visits by European explorers in the eighteenth century, Zambia became the British protectorate of Northern Rhodesia towards the end of the nineteenth century.
The total number of languages spoken in Zambia is 73.
The under-5 mortality rate, per 1,000 births is 145 and the neonatal mortality as a percentage of under 5's mortality is 25.
Female genital mutilation (FGM), while not widespread, is practiced in parts of the country.
In 2011, Zambia was due to host the tenth All-Africa Games, for which three stadiums were to be built in Lusaka, Ndola, and Livingstone.
In recent years, several hundred dispossessed white farmers have left Zimbabwe at the invitation of the Zambian government, to take up farming in the Southern province.
This was undertaken despite opposition from a sizeable minority of the population, who demonstrated against it in 1960–61.
Until the completion of the railway, Zambia's major artery for imports and the critical export of copper was along the TanZam Road, running from Zambia to the port cities in Tanzania.
The ZDF is designed primarily against external threats.
In 2002, following privatisation of the industry, copper production rebounded to 337,000 metric tons.
The lake's other major tributary is the Kalungwishi River, which flows into it from the east.
The main local language, especially in Lusaka, is Nyanja, followed by Bemba.
The fertility rate was 6.2  (6.1 in 1996, 5.9 in 2001–02).
Agriculture plays a very important part in Zambia's economy providing many more jobs than the mining industry.
By 1956, when the last census prior to independence was conducted, there were 65,277 Europeans; 5,450 Asiatics; 5,450 Coloureds and an estimated 2,100,000 Africans.
The '''Republic of Zambia'''  is a landlocked country in Southern Africa, neighbouring the Democratic Republic of the Congo to the north, Tanzania to the north-east, Malawi to the east, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Botswana and Namibia to the south, and Angola to the west.
The Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) is headquartered in Lusaka.
Christian denominations include Catholicism, Anglicanism, Pentecostalism, New Apostolic Church, Lutheranism, Jehovah's Witnesses, the Seventh-day Adventist Church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Branhamites, and a variety of Evangelical denominations.
Output of copper had fallen to a low of 228,000 metric tons in 1998 after a 30-year decline in output due to lack of investment, low copper prices, and uncertainty over privatisation.
Zambia boasts having the highest rugby poles in the world, located at Luanshya Sports Complex in Luanshya.
To the east, in December 1897 a group of the Angoni or Ngoni (originally from Zululand) rebelled under Tsinco, son of King Mpezeni, but the rebellion was put down, and Mpezeni accepted the Pax Britannica.
There were 70,000 Europeans in Zambia in 1964, but many have since left the country.
This expertise was provided in part by John Willson CMG There were over 70,000 Europeans resident in Zambia in 1964, and they remained of disproportionate economic significance.
This sparked a nationwide strike in February 2004.
Refugees who wish to work in Zambia must apply for official permits which can cost up to $500 per year.
In the urban setting there is a continuous integration and evolution of these cultures to produce what is now called "Zambian culture".
They are currently ranked 73rd by the IRB and have 3,650 registered players and three ''formally organised'' clubs.
This is compared with 602.9 in 2008 and 594.2 in 1990.
The University Teaching Hospital serves as both a hospital and a training site for future health workers.
