The surviving R-class Zeppelins were adapted by removing one of  the engines.
The month-old L&nbsp;48, the first U&nbsp;class Zeppelin, was forced to drop to  where it was caught by four aircraft and destroyed, crashing near Theberton, Suffolk.
The plan was subsequently abandoned.
First flown on 16 January 1913, it was wrecked on 19 March of the same year.
For the next raid, on 27–28 November, the Zeppelins avoided London for targets in the Midlands.
Seven people were killed and 35 injured.
Donations, the profits of a special lottery, some public funding, a mortgage of Count von Zeppelin's wife's estate and a 100,000&nbsp;mark contribution by Count von Zeppelin himself allowed the construction of LZ 2, which made only a single flight on 17 January 1906.
The final raid on 5 August 1918 involved four airships and resulted in the loss of ''L.70'' and the death of its entire crew under the command of ''Fregattenkapitän'' Peter Strasser, head of the Imperial German Naval Airship Service and the ''Führer der Luftschiffe''.
A Zeppelin then under construction, L&nbsp;59, was then modified for the mission: it set off from Yambol on 21 November 1917 and nearly reached its destination, but was ordered to return by radio.
The Allies only started to exploit the Zeppelin's great vulnerability to fire when a combination of explosive and incendiary ammunition was introduced during 1916.
In 2000, Westwood Pacific released a video game Command & Conquer Red Alert 2.
An exception was made allowing the construction of one airship for the US Navy, which saved the company from extinction.
The airship was set alight by its crew, but inspection of the wreckage provided the British with much information about the construction of Zeppelins, which was used in the design of the British R33-class airships.
The German Navy remained aggressive, and another 12-Zeppelin raid was launched on 23–24 September.
During World War I the German military made extensive use of Zeppelins as bombers and scouts, killing over 500 people in bombing raids in Britain.
The raids continued in 1916.
On 10 August the antiaircraft guns had their first success, causing L&nbsp;12 to come down into the sea off Zeebrugge,  and on 17–18 August L&nbsp;10 became the first Navy airship to reach London.
It was then used for reconnaissance and bombing missions in the eastern Mediterranean.
Raids on 4/5 April and 5/6 April had little effect, as did a five-Zeppelin raid on 25/6 April and a raid by a single Army Zeppelin the following night.
LZ&nbsp;38 was destroyed on the ground and LZ&nbsp;37 was intercepted in the air by R. A. J. Warneford, who dropped six bombs on the airship, setting it on fire.
The victory earned Leefe Robinson a Victoria Cross; the pieces of SL&nbsp;11 were gathered up and sold as souvenirs by the Red Cross to raise money for wounded soldiers.
The second DELAG airship, LZ&nbsp;7 ''Deutschland'', made its maiden voyage on 19 June 1910.
On 14 May L&nbsp;22 was shot down near Terschelling Bank by an H.12 flown by Lt. Galpin and Sub-Lt. Leckie which had been alerted following interception of its radio traffic.
Nine Zeppelins were sent to Liverpool on the night of 31 January–1 February.
In 1917, following losses to air defences over Britain, new designs were produced which were capable of flying at much higher altitudes, typically operating at around .
A combination of adverse weather and engine failure brought it down at Mount Limberg near Bad Iburg in Lower Saxony, its hull getting stuck in trees.
Von Zeppelin tried to sue the group for using the name Zeppelin, but the case was eventually dismissed.
L&nbsp;45 then reduced altitude to try to escape the winds but was forced back into the higher air currents by a BE2e.
The first naval attempt on London took place on 4 June: strong winds caused the commander of L&nbsp;9 to misjudge his position, and the bombs were dropped on Gravesend.
L&nbsp;55 was badly damaged on landing and later scrapped.
Less than six weeks later, on 17 October, LZ&nbsp;18 (L&nbsp;2) caught fire during its acceptance trials, killing the entire crew.
The ''Hindenburg'' was the largest airship ever built.
Incorporating all the usable parts of LZ&nbsp;2, its successor LZ 3 became the first truly successful Zeppelin.
The Q&nbsp;class was an enlargement of the P&nbsp;class with improved ceiling and bomb-load.
Only one of the 15 defensive sorties managed to make visual contact with the enemy, and one of the pilots, Flt Lieut D. M. Barnes, was killed on attempting to land.
He had previously encountered Union Army balloons in 1863 when he visited the United States as a military observer during the American Civil War.
It has been proposed that modern zeppelins could be powered by hydrogen fuel cells.
Mistaking the reservoirs of the Lea Valley for the Thames, it dropped its bombs on Walthamstow and Leytonstone.
Berg was under contract not to supply aluminium to any other airship manufacturer, and subsequently made a payment to Schwartz's widow as compensation for breaking this agreement.
The first raid of 1917 did not occur until 16–17 March: the five high flying Zeppelins encountered very strong winds and none reached their targets.
Smart succeeded in shooting the Zeppelin down in flames.
A total of 84 Zeppelins were built during the war.
The Navy attempted to follow up the Army's success the following night.
The main use of the airship was in reconnaissance over the North Sea and the Baltic, and the majority of airships manufactured were used by the Navy.
In 1909 Count Zeppelin founded the world's first airline, the Deutsche Luftschiffahrts-Aktiengesellschaft (German Airship Travel Corporation), generally known as DELAG to promote his airships, initially using LZ&nbsp;6, which he had hoped to sell to the German Army.
One Zeppelin targeted the benzol plant at Skinningrove and three set off to bomb London: two were forced to turn back but L&nbsp;13, commanded by ''Kapitänleutnant'' Heinrich Mathy reached London.
No one was seriously injured.
In 2016, EA announced Battlefield 1, set during World War I, where a Zeppelin was featured at the end of its first release trailer.
The Navy resumed raids on Britain in August, when three largely ineffective raids were carried out.
The loss of SL&nbsp;11 to the new ammunition ended the German Army's enthusiasm for raids on Britain.
Despite this performance, the shareholders declined to invest more money, and so the company was liquidated, with Count von Zeppelin purchasing the ship and equipment.
There were only four raids in 1918, all against targets in the Midlands and northern England.
It was replaced by LZ&nbsp;8 ''Deutschland&nbsp;II'' which also had a short career, first flying on 30 March 1911 and becoming damaged beyond repair when caught by a strong cross-wind when being walked out of its shed on 16 May.
Its journey covered  and lasted 95 hours.
Early Zeppelins used rubberised cotton for the gasbags, but most later craft used goldbeater's skin, made from the intestines of cattle.
As a consequence of the RNAS raid both the Army and Navy withdrew from their bases in Belgium.
This revived the company's fortunes, and during the 1930s the airships  ''Graf Zeppelin'' and  the larger LZ 129 ''Hindenburg'' operated regular transatlantic flights from Germany to North America and Brazil.
Some of these could provide reverse thrust for manoeuvring while mooring.
On 31 May Linnarz commanded LZ&nbsp;38 on the first raid against London.
Nine people were killed, 40 injured and £130,203 of damage was caused.
Page's manager Peter Grant suggested changing the spelling of "Lead" to "Led" to avoid mispronunciation.
Aeroplanes struggled to reach a typical altitude of , and firing the solid bullets usually used by aircraft Lewis guns was ineffectual: they made small holes causing inconsequential gas leaks.
They were propelled by several engines, mounted in gondolas  or engine cars, which were attached to the outside of the structural framework.
Five Zeppelins attempted to bomb the Midlands on 12–3 March to little effect.
On 5 August 1914 Z&nbsp;VI bombed Liège.
The ship made another spectacular voyage in July 1931 when it made a seven-day research trip to the Arctic.
New production facilities were set up, assembling Zeppelins from components fabricated in Friedrichshafen.
Its replacement, LZ&nbsp;86, was damaged by antiaircraft fire during its second attack on Bucharest on 26 September and was damaged beyond repair in the resulting forced landing, and was replaced by LZ&nbsp;97.
Count von Zeppelin had died in 1917, before the end of the war.
Zeppelin also sought support from the industrialist Carl Berg, then engaged in construction work on the second airship design of David Schwarz.
The company came under government control, and new personnel were recruited to the company to cope with the increased demand including the aerodynamacist Paul Jaray and the stress engineer Karl Arnstein.
The investigation into the accident concluded that static electricity had ignited hydrogen which had leaked from the gasbags, although there were allegations of sabotage.
Two Navy zeppelins were transferred to Wainoden on the Courland Peninsula.
2nd lieutenant Wulstan Tempest succeeded in setting fire to the airship, which came down near Potters Bar.
Although used by Army airships, they were not used by the Navy, since Strasser considered that their weight meant an unacceptable reduction in bomb load.
Zeppelins were first flown commercially in 1910 by Deutsche Luftschiffahrts-AG (DELAG), the world's first airline in revenue service.
Most of those flights were carried out near the Polish border, first in the Sudeten mountains region of Silesia, then in the Baltic Sea region.
In total some 120 bombs were dropped on a line stretching from Stoke Newington south to Stepney and then north toward Leytonstone.
So, in what proved to be a fatal decision, the ''Hindenburg'' was filled with flammable hydrogen.
The German Navy had some 15 Zeppelins in commission by the end of 1915 and was able to have two or more patrolling continuously at any one time.
L&nbsp;2, was ordered on 30 January.
To counter the increasingly effective defences new Zeppelins were introduced with an increased operating altitude of  and a ceiling of .
Z&nbsp;IV bombed Warsaw on 24 September and was also used to support German army operations in  East Prussia.
The writer D. H. Lawrence described one raid in a letter to Lady Ottoline Morrell:
In April the first Curtiss H.12 "Large America" long-range flying boats were delivered to RNAS Felixstowe, and in July 1917 the aircraft carrier HMS ''Furious'' entered service, and launching platforms for aeroplanes were fitted to the forward turrets of some light cruisers.
Eight older airships bombed targets in the Midlands and northeast, while four R-class Zeppelins attacked London.
Given the designation ZR-3 USS ''Los Angeles'' and refilled with helium (partly sourced from the ''Shenandoah'') after its Atlantic crossing, the airship became the most successful American airship.
This accident would have finished Zeppelin's experiments, but his flights had generated huge public interest and a sense of national pride regarding his work, and spontaneous donations from the public began pouring in, eventually totalling over six million marks.
Convinced of the potential importance of aviation, he started working on various designs in 1891, and had completed detailed designs by 1893.
''Graf Zeppelin'' was retired one month after the ''Hindenburg'' wreck and turned into a museum.
More bombs fell on the textile warehouses north of St Paul's Cathedral, causing a fire which despite the attendance of 22 fire engines caused over half a million pounds of damage: Mathy then turned east, dropping his remaining bombs on Liverpool Street station.
The third drum started a fire and the airship was quickly enveloped in flames.
No bombs had been developed, and the early raids dropped  artillery shells instead.
The mistaken conclusion was the British towers were not connected with radar operations, but were for naval radio communications.
Despite the apparent danger, there remained a list of 400 people who still wanted to fly as Zeppelin passengers and had paid for the trip.
Airship raids on Great Britain were approved by the Kaiser on 7 January 1915, although he excluded London as a target and further demanded that no attacks be made on historic buildings.
Their opportunity came in 1924.
The bomb-load included a  bomb, the largest yet carried.
Responsibility for the detail design was given to Kober, whose place was later taken by Ludwig Dürr, and construction of the first airship began in 1899 in a floating assembly-hall in the Bay of Manzell near Friedrichshafen on Lake Constance (the ''Bodensee'').
Eckener and his crew, which included his son Hans, were once more welcomed enthusiastically, with confetti parades in New York and another invitation to the White House.
On 16 February L&nbsp;3 and L&nbsp;4 were lost owing to a combination of engine failure and high winds, L&nbsp;3 crashing on the Danish island of Fanø without loss of life and L&nbsp;4 coming down at Blaavands Huk; eleven crew escaped from the forward gondola, after which the lightened airship with four crew members remaining in the aft engine car was blown out to sea and lost.
It was dismantled in August 1940.
It fell to the ground near Cuffley, witnessed by the crews of several of the other Zeppelins and many on the ground; there were no survivors.
Two Zeppelins, L&nbsp;3 and L&nbsp;4, intended to attack Humberside but, diverted by strong winds, eventually dropped their bombs on Great Yarmouth, Sheringham, King's Lynn and the surrounding villages, killing four and injuring 16.
"Balloon" was replaced with "Zeppelin" as Jimmy Page saw it as a symbol of "the perfect combination of heavy and light, combustibility and grace."
Zeppelins were very difficult to attack successfully at high altitude, although this also made accurate bombing impossible.
It operated reliably for eight years until it was retired in 1932 for economic reasons.
Ten airships set off on 31 March: most turned back and L&nbsp;15, damaged by antiaircraft fire and an aircraft attacking using Ranken darts, came down in the sea near Margate.
The Army took full control of ground defences in February 1916, and a variety of sub 4-inch (less than 102&nbsp;mm) calibre guns were converted to anti-aircraft use.
In November 1915 LZ&nbsp;81 was used to fly diplomats to Sofia for negotiations with the Bulgarian government.
The first flight took place on 2 July 1900 over Lake Constance.
The coming to power of the Nazi Party in 1933 had important consequences for Zeppelin Luftschiffbau.
From there, ''Graf Zeppelin'' flew to Friedrichshafen, then Tokyo, Los Angeles, and back to Lakehurst, in 21&nbsp;days 5&nbsp;hours and 31&nbsp;minutes.
The raids were intended to target only military sites on the east coast and around the Thames estuary, but bombing accuracy was poor owing to the height at which the airships flew and navigation was problematic.
None of the other Zeppelins reached central London: bombs fell on Woolwich, Guildford, Tonbridge, Croydon, Hertford and an army camp near Folkestone.
The monetary damage was over one sixth of the total damage inflicted by bombing raids during the war.
At the beginning of the conflict the German command had high hopes for the airships, which were considerably more capable than contemporary light fixed-wing machines: they were almost as fast, could carry multiple machine guns, and had enormously greater bomb-load range and endurance.
In 1917 the British Navy began to take effective countermeasures against airship patrols over the North Sea.
Three Army airships set off to bomb London on 7–8 September, of which two succeeded: SL&nbsp;2 dropped bombs between Southwark and Woolwich: LZ&nbsp;74 scattered 39 bombs over Cheshunt before heading on to London and dropping a single bomb on Fenchurch Street station.
Germany had to pay for this airship itself, as the cost was set against the war reparation accounts, but for the Zeppelin company this was unimportant.
While their dirigibles were never as successful, Professor Schütte's more scientific approach to airship design led to important innovations including the streamlined hull shape, the simpler cruciform fins (replacing the more complicated box-like arrangements of older Zeppelins), individual direct-drive engine cars anti-aircraft machine-gun positions, and gas ventilation shafts which transferred vented hydrogen to the top of the airship.
The 10-Zeppelin raid achieved very little; four turned back early and the rest wandered over a fog-covered landscape before giving up.
There were no further raids in 1916 although the Navy lost three more craft, all on 28 December: SL&nbsp;12 was destroyed at Ahlhorn by strong winds after sustaining damage in a poor landing, and at Tondern L&nbsp;24 crashed into the shed while landing: the resulting fire destroyed both L&nbsp;24 and the adjacent L&nbsp;17.
The frequencies searched were too high, an assumption based on the Germans' own radar systems.
The growing popularity of the "giant of the air" made it easy for Eckener to find sponsors.
In July 1916 Luftschiffbau Zeppelin introduced the R-class, 199.49&nbsp;m (644&nbsp;ft 8&nbsp;in) long, and with a volume of .
On 4 March 1936 LZ 129 ''Hindenburg'' (named after former President of Germany Paul von Hindenburg) made its first flight.
On 16–17 June, another raid was attempted.
There is an in-game unit called Kirov which is a large airship that functioned as a bomber build and fielded by the Soviet Union: a direct reference to the Zeppelins of WWI Imperial Germany.
Another project, ''LZ 131'', designed to be even larger than ''Hindenburg'' and ''Graf Zeppelin II'', never progressed beyond the production of a few ring frames.
This had already been a dream of Count von Zeppelin twenty years earlier, which could not be realized at the time due to the outbreak of war.
In March 1940 Göring ordered the scrapping of the remaining airships, and on 6 May the Frankfurt hangars were demolished.
An attempt  to complete the 24-hour trial flight ended when LZ&nbsp;4 had to make a landing at Echterdingen near Stuttgart because of mechanical problems.
In December 1915 additional P&nbsp;class Zeppelins and the first of the new Q&nbsp;class airships,  were delivered.
Flying at a relatively low altitude because of cloud cover, the airship was damaged by small-arms fire and was destroyed in a forced landing near Bonn.
This enabled the Count to found the ''Luftschiffbau Zeppelin GmbH'' (Airship Construction Zeppelin Ltd.) and the Zeppelin Foundation.
These accidents deprived the Navy of most of its experienced personnel: the head of the Admiralty Air Department was killed in the L&nbsp;1 and his successor died in the L&nbsp;2.
On the same day Galpin and Leckie intercepted and attacked L&nbsp;46.
The P class was followed by a lengthened version, the Q class.
Although these raids had no significant military impact, the psychological effect was considerable.
In the following year, ''Graf Zeppelin'' undertook trips around Europe, and following a successful tour to Recife, Brazil in May 1930, it was decided to open the first regular transatlantic airship line.
On 28–29 July the first raid to include one of the new and much larger R-class Zeppelins, L&nbsp;31, took place.
The following night two Navy Zeppelins bombed targets in the north of England, killing 22 and injuring 130.
L&nbsp;5 was carrying out a routine patrol when it picked up Admiral Hipper's radio signal announcing that he was engaged with the British battle cruiser squadron.
The Imperial German Army bought LZ&nbsp;3 and LZ&nbsp;5 (a sister-ship to LZ&nbsp;4 which was completed in May 1909) and designated them Z&nbsp;1 and Z&nbsp;II respectively.
On the eastern front, Z&nbsp;V was brought down by ground fire on 28 August during the Battle of Tannenberg; most of the crew were captured.
The Zeppelin was the target of concentrated antiaircraft fire, but no hits were scored and the falling shrapnel caused both damage and alarm on the ground.
After the outstanding success of the Zeppelin design, the word ''zeppelin''  came to be commonly used to refer to all rigid airships.
Despite the beginning of the Great Depression and growing competition from fixed-wing aircraft, ''LZ 127'' transported an increasing volume of passengers and mail across the ocean every year until 1936.
Henceforth his name is not to be mentioned in the newspapers and his photograph is not to be published"
In 1898 Count Zeppelin founded the ''Gesellschaft zur Förderung der Luftschiffahrt'' (Society for the Promotion of Airship Flight), contributing more than half of its 800,000&nbsp;mark share-capital himself.
Modern zeppelins are held aloft by the inert gas helium, eliminating the danger of combustion illustrated by the ''Hindenburg''.
The newly commissioned Schütte-Lanz SL&nbsp;11 dropped a few bombs on Hertfordshire while approaching London: it was picked up by searchlights as it bombed Ponders End and at around 02:15 it was intercepted by a BE2c flown by Lt. William Leefe Robinson, who fired three 40-round drums  of Brocks and Buckingham ammunition into the airship.
In the American science fiction series, ''Fringe'', Zeppelins are a notable historical idiosyncrasy that helps differentiate the series' two parallel universes, also used in ''Doctor Who'' in the episodes "The Rise of the Cybermen" and "The Age of Steel" when the TARDIS crashes in an alternate reality where Britain is a 'people's republic' and Pete Tyler, Rose Tyler's father, is alive and is a wealthy inventor.
The first raid of 1916 was carried out by the German Navy.
After three more raids were scattered by the weather, a five-Zeppelin raid was launched by the Navy on 13 October, the "Theatreland Raid."
A combination of rain and snowstorms scattered the airships while they were still over the North Sea.
L&nbsp;30 did not even cross the coast, dropping its bombs at sea.
Zeppelins became a propaganda tool for the new regime: they would now display the Nazi swastika on their fins and occasionally tour Germany to play march music and propaganda speeches to the people.
Zeppelins are often featured in alternate history fiction.
In 1934 Joseph Goebbels, the Minister of Propaganda, contributed two million reichsmarks towards the construction of LZ&nbsp;129 and in 1935 Hermann Göring established a new airline directed by Ernst Lehmann, the ''Deutsche Zeppelin Reederei'', as a subsidiary of ''Lufthansa'' to take over Zeppelin operations.
One of these was the American press tycoon William Randolph Hearst, who requested that the tour officially start in Lakehurst.
They were frustrated by heavy cloud but the effort led the Kaiser to announce that airship raids on London were to stop; under pressure he later relented to allow the Zeppelins to attack under "favourable circumstances".
The crew survived but were taken prisoner.
Only one of the naval airships came within seven miles of central London, and both damage and casualties were slight.
This was intended to be filled with inert helium.
The Art Deco spire of the Empire State Building was originally designed to serve as a mooring mast for Zeppelins and other airships, although it was found that high winds made this impossible and the plan was abandoned.
Under these circumstances, Eckener managed to obtain an order for the next American dirigible.
The following night three Zeppelins set off, but two turned back because of the weather: the third bombed Hartlepool, killing eight and injuring 29.
The United States had started to experiment with rigid airships, constructing one of their own, the ZR-1 USS ''Shenandoah'', and buying the R38 (based on the Zeppelin L&nbsp;70) when the British airship programme was cancelled.
As it headed towards Chelmsford it began to lose height and came down close to Little Wigborough.
Access to the Zeppelin was achieved in a number of ways.
On 24 April 1912 the Imperial German Navy ordered its first Zeppelin - an enlarged version of the airships operated by DELAG - which received the naval designation Z&nbsp;1 and entered Navy service in October 1912.
In 1915 patrols were only carried out on 124 days, and in other years the total was considerably less.
Z&nbsp;II was wrecked in a gale in April 1910, while Z&nbsp;I flew until 1913, when it was decommissioned and replaced by LZ&nbsp;15, designated ''ersatz'' Z&nbsp;I.
At the beginning of the war Captain Ernst A. Lehmann and Baron Gemmingen, Count Zeppelin's nephew, developed an observation car for use by dirigibles.
13 passengers and 22 crew, including Ernst Lehmann, were killed.
One airship, the L&nbsp;19, came down in the North Sea because of engine failure and damage from Dutch ground–fire.
Two Navy raids failed due to bad weather on 14 and 15 April, and it was decided to delay further attempts until the more capable P class Zeppelins were in service.
It flew one bombing mission against Naples on 10–11 March 1918.
On 12 October at 07:30 local time the Zeppelin took off for the US under the command of Hugo Eckener.
A '''Zeppelin''' was a type of rigid airship named after the German Count Ferdinand von Zeppelin who pioneered rigid airship development at the beginning of the 20th century.
By the end of 1914 the Army's airship strength was reduced to four.
A combination of poor weather and mechanical problems scattered them across the Midlands and several towns were bombed.
A five-Zeppelin raid on 12–13 April was also largely ineffective, with thick clouds making accurate navigation impossible.
They are also seen in the alternate reality 1939 plot line in the film ''Sky Captain and the World of Tomorrow'', and have an iconic association with the steampunk subcultural movement in broader terms.
Patrolling had priority over any other airship activity.
Twice Royal Naval Air Service (RNAS) aircraft tried to intercept LZ&nbsp;38 but on both occasions it was either able to outclimb the aircraft or was already at too great an altitude for the aircraft to intercept.
These four raids killed six people and injured six, causing property damage estimated at £16,898.
This was equipped with a wicker chair, chart table, electric lamp and compass, with telephone line and lightning conductor part of the suspension cable.
HMS ''Yarmouth launched its Sopwith Pup,  and Sub-Lt. B.
The RNAS had also bombed the Zeppelin bases in Cologne on 22 September 1914.
The airships relied largely on dead reckoning, supplemented by a radio direction-finding system of limited accuracy.
Before World War I (1914–1918) the Zeppelin company manufactured 21 more airships.
L&nbsp;57, a specially lengthened craft was to have flown the mission but was destroyed shortly after completion.
In 1917 the German High Command made an attempt to use a Zeppelin to deliver supplies to Lettow-Vorbeck's forces in German East Africa.
Zeppelin technology improved considerably as a result of the increasing demands of warfare.
L&nbsp;1 was lost on 9 September near Heligoland when caught in a storm while taking part in an exercise with the German fleet.
The defeat of Germany in 1918 temporarily slowed down the airship business.
This renewed the interest of the German military, but a condition of purchase of an airship was a 24-hour endurance trial.
