The Mutambara formation has been weakened by defections from MPs and individuals who are disillusioned by their manifesto.
The first five years after independence saw rapid gains in areas such as immunisation coverage, access to health care, and contraceptive prevalence rate.
One body was identified as a ZANLA cadre, Cde Rauya, by the Fallen Heroes Trust Chief exhumer.
With Lord Carrington, Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom, in the chair, these discussions were mounted from 10 September to 15 December in 1979, producing a total of 47 plenary sessions.
When the opposition returned to the polls in 2000, they won 57 seats, only five fewer than ZANU.
It was introduced in March 1994 after a nationwide competition to replace "" as a distinctly Zimbabwean song.
In December 1966, the organisation complied, imposing the first mandatory trade embargo on an autonomous state.
The following year, Zimbabwean officials voluntarily terminated its Commonwealth membership.
Biltong, a type of jerky, is a popular snack, prepared by hanging bits of spiced raw meat to dry in the shade.
In March 1978, Smith reached an accord with three African leaders, led by Bishop Abel Muzorewa, who offered to leave the white population comfortably entrenched in exchange for the establishment of a biracial democracy.
Zimbabwe has 16 official languages and under the constitution, an Act of Parliament may prescribe other languages as officially recognised languages.
The health system has more or less collapsed.
At the end of November 2008, some operations at three of Zimbabwe's four major referral hospitals had shut down, along with the Zimbabwe Medical School, and the fourth major hospital had two wards and no operating theatres working.
The Internal Settlement left control of the Rhodesian Security Forces, civil service, judiciary, and a third of parliament seats to whites.
Many of the current politicians in the government of Zimbabwe have obtained degrees from universities in USA or other universities abroad.
This Shona state ruled much of the area that is known as Zimbabwe today, and parts of central Mozambique.
The white population dropped from a peak of around 278,000 or 4.3% of the population in 1975 to possibly 120,000 in 1999, and was estimated to be no more than 50,000 in 2002, and possibly much less.
In addition, Zimbabwean-trained doctors only require one year of residence to be fully licensed doctors in the United States.
In terms of carats produced, the Marange field is one of the largest diamond producing projects in the world, estimated to produce 12 million carats in 2014 worth over $350 million.
Robert Mugabe, leader of the ZANU party, was the country's first Prime Minister and Head of Government.
It is known by many names including the Mutapa Empire, also known as ''Mwene Mutapa'' or ''Monomotapa'' as well as "Munhumutapa," and was renowned for its strategic trade routes with the Arabs and Portugal.
One can also find local snacks, such as ''maputi'' (roasted/popped maize kernels similar to popcorn), roasted and salted peanuts, sugar cane, sweet potato, pumpkin, and indigenous fruits, such as horned melon, ''gaka'', ''adansonia'', ''mawuyu'', ''uapaca kirkiana'', ''mazhanje'' (sugar plum), and many others.
On 1 June 1979, Muzorewa, the UANC head, became prime minister and the country's name was changed to Zimbabwe Rhodesia.
Zimbabwe's involvement from 1998 to 2002 in the war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo drained hundreds of millions of dollars from the economy.
It has been repeatedly accused of using the public broadcaster, the Zimbabwe Broadcasting Corporation, as a propaganda tool.
The Fifth Brigade was formed in 1981 and disbanded in 1988 after the demonstration of mass brutality and murder during the brigade's occupation of Matabeleland in what has become known as Gukurahundi (), the campaign which finished off Mugabe's liberation struggle.
The University of Zimbabwe, the first and largest, was built in 1952 and is located in the Harare suburb of Mount Pleasant.
This Shona state further refined and expanded upon Mapungubwe's stone architecture, which survives to this day at the ruins of the kingdom's capital of Great Zimbabwe.
The opposition MDC called for research on all violence that included killings of its supporters during disputed elections in 2008.
The House of Assembly is the lower chamber of Parliament.
Victoria Falls on the Zambezi, which are shared with Zambia, are located in the north west of Zimbabwe.
Due to ministerial differences between their respective political parties, the agreement was not fully implemented until 13 February 2009.
The Ministry of Education of Zimbabwe maintains and operates the government schools but the fees charged by independent schools are regulated by the cabinet of Zimbabwe.
The Matabele unrest led to what has become known as ''Gukurahundi'' ( chaff before the spring rains").
In 1996, civil servants, nurses, and junior doctors went on strike over salary issues.
After winning the election,the Mugabe government doubled the civil service and, according to The Economist, embarked on "...misrule and dazzling corruption."
The most famous of these are the Great Zimbabwe ruins in Masvingo.
Under the new constitution, Southern Rhodesia became a self-governing British colony, subsequent to a 1922 referendum.
The heavy-handedness on the media has progressively relaxed since 2009.
In August 2008 large areas of Zimbabwe were struck by the ongoing cholera epidemic.
There are many factors which continue to determine the nature, for the foreseeable future, of water supply and sanitation in Zimbabwe.
A further alternative, put forward by nationalists in Matabeleland, had been "Matopos", referring to the Matopos Hills to the south of Bulawayo.
Section 4C instructs the Secretary of the Treasury to direct directors at international financial institutions to veto the extension of loans and credit to the Zimbabwean government.
Mwari simply means "God the Creator" (musika vanhu in Shona).
The country's rainy season generally runs from late October to March and the hot climate is moderated by increasing altitude.
While noting that the activists had suffered injuries, but not mentioning the cause of them, the Zimbabwean government-controlled daily newspaper ''The Herald'' claimed the police had intervened after demonstrators "ran amok looting shops, destroying property, mugging civilians, and assaulting police officers and innocent members of the public".
The first Prime Minister of Rhodesia, Ian Smith, wrote two books  ''The Great Betrayal'' and ''Bitter Harvest.''
The rapid drop was ascribed mainly to the HIV/AIDS pandemic.
Proportional to the white population, Southern Rhodesia contributed more per capita to both the First and Second World Wars than any other part of the Empire, including Britain itself.
Charles Mungoshi is renowned in Zimbabwe for writing traditional stories in English and in Shona and his poems and books have sold well with both the black and white communities.
Severe storms are rare.
Wards are subdivided into villages, each of which has an elected Village Development Committee and a Headman (traditional leader subordinate to the kraalhead).
The campaign officially ended in 1987 after Nkomo and Mugabe reached a unity agreement that merged their respective parties, creating the Zimbabwe African National Union – Patriotic Front (ZANU–PF).
The British South Africa Company of Cecil Rhodes first demarcated the present territory during the 1890s; it became the self-governing British colony of Southern Rhodesia in 1923.
The Zimbabwean government suppresses freedom of the press and freedom of speech.
The Zimbabwe Institution of Engineers (ZIE) is the highest professional board for engineers.
Sadza is also commonly eaten with curdled milk (sour milk), commonly known as "lacto" (''mukaka wakakora''), or dried Tanganyika sardine, known locally as ''kapenta'' or ''matemba''.
English is the main language used in the education and judiciary systems.
The Zimbabwean government and its supporters attest that it was Western policies to avenge the expulsion of their kin that sabotaged the economy.
The Hills were formed over 2,000 million years ago with granite being forced to the surface, then being eroded to produce smooth "whaleback dwalas" and broken kopjes, strewn with boulders and interspersed with thickets of vegetation.
National examinations are written during the third term in November, with "O" level and "A" level subjects also offered in June.
Notable cricket players from Zimbabwe include Andy Flower, the former coach of the England Cricket Team.
Much of the country is covered by miombo woodland, dominated by brachystegia species and others.
A representative of the organisation declined to speculate on how the money was spent, except that it was not for the intended purpose, and the government has failed to honour requests to return the money.
finance infrastructure projects, and the political stability of the Zimbabwean state.
Scouting in the former Rhodesia and Nyasaland started in 1909 when the first Boy Scout troop was registered.
Baden-Powell and Burnham discussed the concept of a broad training programme in woodcraft for young men, rich in exploration, tracking, fieldcraft, and self-reliance.
A 2011 survey by Freedom House suggests that living conditions have improved since the power-sharing agreement.
It was initially unclear how the chosen term was to be used — a letter written by Mawema in 1961 refers to "Zimbabweland" — but "Zimbabwe" was sufficiently established by 1962 to become the generally preferred term of the black nationalist movement.
Shortly after Rhodes' disastrous Jameson Raid on the South African Republic, the Ndebele rebelled against white rule, led by their  charismatic religious leader, Mlimo.
Besides scouting, there are also leadership, life skills and general knowledge courses and training experiences mainly for school children ranging from pre-school to final year high school students and some times those beyond High school.
Zimbabwean musicians like Thomas Mapfumo, Oliver Mtukudzi, the Bhundu Boys; Alick Macheso  and Audius Mtawarira have achieved international recognition.
Several authors are well known within Zimbabwe and abroad.
Meanwhile, Rhodesia's internal conflict intensified, eventually forcing him to open negotiations with the militant nationalists.
On 11 December 1979, the Rhodesian House of Assembly voted 90 to nil to revert to British colonial status (the 'aye' votes included Ian Smith himself).
Other ruins include Khami Ruins, Zimbabwe, Dhlo-Dhlo and Naletale, although none of these is as famous as Great Zimbabwe.
Like in many African countries, the majority of Zimbabweans depend on a few staple foods.
Even though the Afrikaners are a small group (10%) within the white minority group, Afrikaner recipes are popular.
The name "Zimbabwe" is based on a Shona term for Great Zimbabwe, an ancient ruined city in the country's south-east whose remains are now a protected site.
GDP grew by more than 5% in the years 2009 and 2011.
Radio and television news now broadcast in Shona, Sindebele and English.
By 1838, the Rozwi Empire, along with the other smaller Shona states were conquered by the Ndebele and reduced to vassaldom.
The winning entry was a song written by Professor Solomon Mutswairo and composed by Fred Changundega.
In mid-June 1896, during a scouting patrol in the Matobo Hills, Burnham began teaching Baden-Powell woodcraft.
It was also during this time in the Matobo Hills that Baden-Powell first started to wear his signature campaign hat like the one worn by Burnham.
These courses and outings, are held at places like ''Lasting Impressions'' (), ''Far and Wide Zimbabwe'' ( Far and wide.)
Africa University is a United Methodist related university institution located in Manicaland which attracts students from at least 36 African countries.
Burnished by his anti-imperialist credentials, contemporary African political leaders have been reluctant to criticise Mugabe, though Archbishop Desmond Tutu has called him "a cartoon figure of an archetypal African dictator."
They traded in gold, ivory, and copper for cloth and glass.
Australia's Qantas, Germany's Lufthansa, and Austrian Airlines were among the first to pull out and most recently British Airways suspended all direct flights to Harare.
A potpourri of peanuts known as ''nzungu'', boiled and sundried maize, black-eyed peas known as ''nyemba'', and bambara groundnuts known as ''nyimo'' makes a traditional dish called ''mutakura''.
Newspapers critical of the government, such as the ''Daily News'', closed after bombs exploded at their offices and the government refused to renew their license.
As a result, many press organisations have been set up in both neighbouring and Western countries by exiled Zimbabweans.
An association of doctors in Zimbabwe has made calls for President Mugabe to make moves to assist the ailing health service.
Zimbabwe has also competed at Wimbledon and the Davis Cup in tennis, most notably with the Black family, which comprises Wayne Black, Byron Black and Cara Black.
Rhodes used this document in 1890 to justify sending the Pioneer Column, a group of Europeans protected by well-armed British South Africa Police (BSAP) through Matabeleland and into Shona territory to establish Fort Salisbury (now Harare), and thereby establish company rule over the area.
According to Mawema, black nationalists held a meeting in 1960 to choose an alternative name for the country, and names including Machobana and Monomotapa were proposed before his suggestion, Zimbabwe, prevailed.
In late January 2013, the Zimbabwean finance ministry reported that they had only $217 in their treasury and would apply for donations to finance the coming elections that is estimated to cost 107 million USD.
In November 2008, the government of Zimbabwe spent US$7.3 million donated by the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria.
During the 1990s, students, trade unionists, and other workers often demonstrated to express their growing discontent with Mugabe and Zanu-PF party policies.
The results of this election were withheld for two weeks, after which it was generally acknowledged that the Movement for Democratic Change – Tsvangirai (MDC-T) had achieved a majority of one seat in the lower house of parliament.
A country of roughly 13 million people, Zimbabwe has 16 official languages, with English, Shona, and Ndebele the most commonly used.
By 2005, the purchasing power of the average Zimbabwean had dropped to the same levels in real terms as 1953.
"Mealie meal", also known as cornmeal, is used to prepare ''sadza'' or ''isitshwala'', as well as porridge known as ''bota'' or ''ilambazi''.
This was the precursor to the more impressive Shona civilisations that would dominate the region during the 13th to 15th centuries, evidenced by ruins at Great Zimbabwe, near Masvingo, and other smaller sites.
They have the potential to improve the fiscal situation of the country considerably, but almost all revenues from the field have disappeared into the pockets of army officers and ZANU-PF politicians.
In Harare, the city council offered free graves to cholera victims.
The flame of independence is lit by the president after parades by the presidential family and members of the armed forces of Zimbabwe.
The provinces are subdivided into 59 districts and 1,200 wards (sometimes referred to as municipalities).
In February 2013, Zimbabwe's election chief, Simpson Mtambanengwe, resigned due to ill health.
Police action was strongly condemned by the UN Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon, the European Union and the United States.
The Bantu languages Shona and Sindebele are the principal indigenous languages of Zimbabwe.
World-renowned Zimbabwean sculptors include Nicholas, Nesbert and Anderson Mukomberanwa, Tapfuma Gutsa, Henry Munyaradzi and Locardia Ndandarika.
This represented a state of hyperinflation, and the central bank introduced a new 100 billion dollar note.
The book ''The House of Hunger'' by Dambudzo Marechera won an award in the UK in 1979 and the Nobel Prize-winning author Doris Lessing's first novel ''The Grass Is Singing'', the first four volumes of  ''The Children of Violence'' sequence, as well as the collection of short stories ''African Stories'' are set in Rhodesia.
The gains on the national health were eroded by structural adjustment in the 1990s, the impact of the HIV/AIDS pandemic and the economic crisis since the year 2000.
Thousands of others were tortured in military internment camps.
Southern Rhodesia was annexed by the United Kingdom on 12 September 1923.
and ''Chimanimani Outward Bound'' (), Just to name a few.
Since the appointment of a new media and information minister in 2013 the media is currently facing less political interference and the supreme court has ruled some sections of the strict media laws as unconstitutional.
Relying on centuries of military, political and religious development, the Rozwi (meaning "destroyers") expelled the Portuguese from the Zimbabwean plateau by force of arms.
World's View is in these mountains and it is from here that places as far away as  are visible and, on clear days, the town of Rusape can be seen.
Its guidance, cultural values is the encouragement of all its members and society of those attitudes of fair mindedness, understanding, tolerance and respect for people and views which are essential for the attainment and maintenance of justice, peace and harmony at all times.
There is no current comprehensive survey, although the following figures are available:
Zimbabwe is the biggest trading partner of South Africa on the continent.
There are around 350 species of mammals that can be found in Zimbabwe.
On 22 June, citing the continuing unfairness of the process and refusing to participate in a "violent, illegitimate sham of an election process", Tsvangirai pulled out of the presidential run-off, the ZEC held the run-off and President Mugabe received a landslide majority.
In its 2008 report, Reporters Without Borders ranked the Zimbabwean media as 151st out of 173.
The bill then passed the Senate and was assented to by the President.
In 2011, there were reports of 640 corpses having been recovered from the Monkey William Mine in Chibondo.
Other government functions at district level are carried out by district offices of national government departments.
Approximately 7% of citizens have no religious practice or are atheist.
They are created when ancient granite intrusions are exposed to weathering, as softer rocks surrounding them erode away.
Around 1% of the population is Muslim.
At independence, the policies of racial inequality were reflected in the disease patterns of the black majority.
As in other African countries, Christianity may be mixed with enduring traditional beliefs.
Each district is headed by a District Administrator, appointed by the Public Service Commission.
Following the fifth Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting (CHOGM), held in Lusaka, Zambia from 1 to 7 August in 1979, the British government invited Muzorewa, Mugabe, and Nkomo to participate in a constitutional conference at Lancaster House.
The brigade support units were composed almost entirely of specialists of the former Rhodesian Army, while unintegrated battalions of the Rhodesian African Rifles were assigned to the 1st, 3rd and 4th Brigades.
According to human rights organisations such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch the government of Zimbabwe violates the rights to shelter, food, freedom of movement and residence, freedom of assembly and the protection of the law.
President Robert Mugabe's Zimbabwe African National Union – Patriotic Front (commonly abbreviated ZANU-PF) has been the dominant political party in Zimbabwe since independence.
The semi-presidential system was done away with the adoption of a new constitution after a referendum in March 2013.
In July 2009 the BBC and CNN were able to resume operations and report legally and openly from Zimbabwe.
The first independence celebrations were held in 1980 at the Zimbabwe Grounds.
After losing their remaining South African lands in 1840, Mzilikazi and his tribe permanently settled in the southwest of present-day Zimbabwe in what became known as Matabeleland, establishing Bulawayo as their capital.
On 29 January 2009, in an effort to counteract runaway inflation, acting Finance Minister Patrick Chinamasa announced that Zimbabweans will be permitted to use other, more stable currencies to do business, alongside the Zimbabwe dollar.
The followers of ethnic religions are around 11%.
Boerewors is served with sadza.
Inflation rose from an annual rate of 32% in 1998, to an official estimated high of 11,200,000% in August 2008 according to the country's Central Statistical Office.
The rocks are perfectly balanced without other supports.
There are seven public (Government) universities as well as four church-related universities in Zimbabwe that are fully internationally accredited.
Catherine Buckle has achieved international recognition with her two books ''African Tears'' and ''Beyond Tears'' which tell of the ordeal she went through under the 2000 Land Reform.
Rhodesians of all races served on behalf of the United Kingdom during the two World Wars.
It borders South Africa to the south, Botswana and Namibia to the west, Zambia to the northwest, and Mozambique to the east and northeast.
The National University of Science and Technology strives to become a flourishing and reputable institution not only in Zimbabwe and in Southern Africa but also among the international fraternity of Universities.
This corresponds roughly to the precolonial territory of the Shona people and the Matabele people, although there are significant ethnic minorities in most provinces.
The most major of these were the Zimbabwe African National Union (led by Robert Mugabe from 1975), and the Zimbabwe African People's Union, led by Joshua Nkomo from its founding in the early 1960s.
BBC News, Sky News, and CNN were banned from filming or reporting from Zimbabwe.
These highlands are renowned for their great natural beauty, with famous tourist destinations such as Nyanga, Troutbeck, Chimanimani, Vumba and Chirinda Forest at Mount Selinda.
Rugby union is a significant sport in Zimbabwe.
Shona agitators staged unsuccessful revolts (known as ''Chimurenga'') against company rule during 1896 and 1897.
On 28 April 2008, Tsvangirai and Mutambara announced at a joint news conference in Johannesburg that the two MDC formations were co-operating, enabling the MDC to have a clear parliamentary majority.
Zimbabwe then rejoined the Commonwealth of Nations—which it withdrew from in 2003.
In a 2001 interview, black nationalist Edson Zvobgo recalled that the name was mentioned by Mawema during a political rally, "and it caught hold, and that was that".
The media of Zimbabwe is now once again diverse, having come under tight restriction between 2002 and 2008 by the government during the growing economic and political crisis in the country.
Internationally famous artists include Henry Mudzengerere and Nicolas Mukomberanwa.
The Eastern Highlands are a series of mountainous areas near the border with Mozambique.
The southern areas are known for their heat and aridity, parts of the central plateau receive frost in winter, the Zambezi valley is also known for its extreme heat and the Eastern Highlands usually experience cool temperatures and the highest rainfall in the country.
Zimplats, the nation's largest platinum company, has proceeded with US$500 million in expansions, and is also continuing a separate US$2 billion project, despite threats by Mugabe to nationalise the company.
Tourism was an important industry for the country, but has been failing in recent years.
The MDC-T led by Morgan Tsvangirai is now the majority in the Lower chamber of Parliament.
Around the early 10th century, trade developed with Arab merchants on the Indian Ocean coast, helping to develop the Kingdom of Mapungubwe in the 11th century.
The main archaeological site uses a unique dry stone architecture.
The ones found on the current notes of Zimbabwe, named the Banknote Rocks, are located in Epworth, approximately  south east of Harare.
Official fertility rates over the last decade were 3.6 (2002 Census), 3.8 (2006) and 3.8 (2012 Census).
Zimbabwe has a tropical climate with many local variations.
The two MDC camps had their congresses in 2006 with Tsvangirai being elected to lead MDC-T, which has become more popular than the other group.
In 1953, in the face of African opposition, Britain consolidated the two Rhodesias with Nyasaland (Malawi) in the ill-fated Central African Federation, which was essentially dominated by Southern Rhodesia.
The National Anthem of Zimbabwe is "Blessed be the Land of Zimbabwe" (; ).
'''Zimbabwe''' (), officially the '''Republic of Zimbabwe''', is a landlocked sovereign state located in southern Africa, between the Zambezi and Limpopo Rivers.
Zimbabwe maintained positive economic growth throughout the 1980s (5% GDP growth per year) and 1990s (4.3% GDP growth per year).
An estimated 80% of the country's citizens identify themselves as Christians.
, rugby union also has a very strong following and cricket also has a following, traditionally among the white minority.
There are two theories on the origin of the word.
Zimbabwe now allows trade in the United States dollar and various other currencies such as the rand (South Africa), the pula (Botswana), the euro, and the Pound Sterling (UK).
On the same day, Silaigwana announced that the recounts for the final five constituencies had been completed, that the results were being collated and that they would be published on 29 April.
These formations are a feature of south and east tropical Africa from northern South Africa northwards to Sudan.
Among members of the white minority community, Theatre has a large following, with numerous theatrical companies performing in Zimbabwe's urban areas.
The Marange diamond fields, discovered in 2006, are considered the biggest diamond find in over a century.
Mugabe was re-elected president in the July 2013 Zimbabwean general election  which The Economist described as "rigged.").
Taxes and tariffs are high for private enterprises, while state enterprises are strongly subsidised.
The HIV infection rate in Zimbabwe was estimated to be 14% for people aged 15–49 in 2009.
The Matobo Hills are an area of granite kopjes and wooded valleys commencing some  south of Bulawayo in southern Zimbabwe.
former farm workers
The Ndebele fought their way northwards into the Transvaal, leaving a trail of destruction in their wake and beginning an era of widespread devastation known as the Mfecane.
Since 1 January 2002, the government of Zimbabwe has had its lines of credit at international financial institutions frozen, through US legislation called the Zimbabwe Democracy and Economic Recovery Act of 2001 (ZDERA).
Smith declared Rhodesia a republic in 1970, following the results of a referendum the previous year, but this went unrecognised internationally.
An independent study has shown that the sanctions have adversely affected the welfare of ordinary citizens.
The provincial government is run by a Provincial Administrator, appointed by the Public Service Commission.
As a direct response to increased European presence in the interior, a new Shona state emerged, known as the Rozwi Empire.
