Zinc in the form of ZDDP, is used as an anti-wear additive for metal parts in engine oil.
This superplasticity of the alloy allows it to be molded using die casts made of ceramics and cement.
Although neither zinc nor zirconium are ferromagnetic, their alloy  exhibits ferromagnetism below 35&nbsp;K.
The World Health Organization advocates zinc supplementation for severe malnutrition and diarrhea.
When behind an absorbing mask, the CZT sensor array can determine the direction of the rays.
Alchemists burned zinc metal in air and collected the resulting zinc oxide on a condenser.
Similar claims appear in web forums.
About 346 million tonnes have been extracted throughout history to 2002, and scholars have estimated that about 109–305 million tonnes are in use.
Large deposits are in Australia, Canada and the United States, with the largest reserves in Iran.
Above 210&nbsp;°C, the metal becomes brittle again and can be pulverized by beating.
Zinc mines are scattered throughout the world, with the main areas being China, Australia, and Peru.
Worldwide, 95% of new zinc is mined from sulfidic ore deposits, in which sphalerite (ZnS) is nearly always mixed with the sulfides of copper, lead and iron.
Major plant sources of zinc include cooked dried beans, sea vegetables, fortified cereals, soy foods, nuts, peas, and seeds.
In some respects zinc is chemically similar to magnesium: both elements exhibit only one normal oxidation state (+2), and the Zn2+ and Mg2+ ions are of similar size.
Nearly two billion people in the developing world are deficient in zinc.
The nucleus of a metastable isotope is in an excited state and will return to the ground state by emitting a photon in the form of a gamma ray.
Zinc is a fair conductor of electricity.
A recent example showed 6 micromolar killing 93% of all ''Daphnia'' in water.
In weak basic solutions containing  ions, the hydroxide  forms as a white precipitate.
The basic unit of Volta's pile was a simplified galvanic cell, made of plates of copper and zinc separated by an electrolyte and connected by a conductor externally.
With the exception of wurtzite, all these other minerals were formed by weathering of the primordial zinc sulfides.
Zinc ores were used to make the zinc–copper alloy brass thousands of years prior to the discovery of zinc as a separate element.
The Age-Related Eye Disease Study determined that zinc can be part of an effective treatment for age-related macular degeneration.
In blood plasma, zinc is bound to and transported by albumin (60%, low-affinity) and transferrin (10%).
The nitrate , chlorate , sulfate , phosphate , molybdate , cyanide , arsenite , arsenate  and the chromate  (one of the few colored zinc compounds) are a few examples of other common inorganic compounds of zinc.
Zinc ions are effective antimicrobial agents even at low concentrations.
Alloys of zinc with small amounts of copper, aluminium, and magnesium are useful in die casting as well as spin casting, especially in the automotive, electrical, and hardware industries.
This changed in 1940 when carbonic anhydrase, an enzyme that scrubs carbon dioxide from blood, was shown to have zinc in its active site.
These devices are similar to an integrated circuit and can detect the energy of incoming gamma ray photons.
The most recent estimate of reserve base for zinc (meets specified minimum physical criteria related to current mining and production practices) was made in 2009 and calculated to be roughly 480 Mt.
Cells in the salivary gland, prostate, immune system, and intestine use zinc signaling to communicate with other cells.
A jacket of isotopically enriched  would be irradiated by the intense high-energy neutron flux from an exploding thermonuclear weapon, forming a large amount of  significantly increasing the radioactivity of the weapon's fallout.
Zinc in rivers flowing through industrial and mining areas can be as high as 20&nbsp;ppm.
Evidence shows that people taking 100–300&nbsp;mg of zinc daily may suffer induced copper deficiency.
Recent research suggests that the topical antimicrobial zinc pyrithione is a potent heat shock response inducer that may impair genomic integrity with induction of PARP-dependent energy crisis in cultured human keratinocytes and melanocytes.
Crystals of ZnS are used in lasers that operate in the mid-infrared part of the spectrum.
is used as a tracer to study how alloys that contain zinc wear out, or the path and the role of zinc in organisms.
Similarly, a zinc plug attached to a propeller or the metal protective guard for the keel of the ship provides temporary protection.
This procedure became commercially practical by 1752.
Chelated zinc is used in toothpastes and mouthwashes to prevent bad breath.
Other metals long known to form binary alloys with zinc are aluminium, antimony, bismuth, gold, iron, lead, mercury, silver, tin, magnesium, cobalt, nickel, tellurium and sodium.
One reported case of chronic ingestion of 425 pennies (over 1&nbsp;kg of zinc) resulted in death due to gastrointestinal bacterial and fungal sepsis.
The most common decay mode of a radioisotope of zinc with a mass number lower than 66 is electron capture.
That isotope has such a long half-life, at , that its radioactivity can be ignored.
Strabo writing in the 1st century BC (but quoting a now lost work of the 4th century BC historian Theopompus) mentions "drops of false silver" which when mixed with copper make brass.
For further processing two basic methods are used: pyrometallurgy or electrowinning.
On June 16, 2009, the FDA ordered removal of zinc-based intranasal cold products from store shelves.
The resulting calamine brass was then either cast or hammered into shape for use in weaponry.
Gastroenteritis is strongly attenuated by ingestion of zinc, possibly by direct antimicrobial action of the ions in the gastrointestinal tract, or by the absorption of the zinc and re-release from immune cells (all granulocytes secrete zinc), or both.
Galvani's friend, Alessandro Volta, continued researching the effect and invented the Voltaic pile in 1800.
The units were stacked in series to make the Voltaic cell, which produced electricity by directing electrons from the zinc to the copper and allowing the zinc to corrode.
A coordinate covalent bond is formed between the terminal peptide and a C=O group attached to zinc, which gives the carbon a positive charge.
, the most abundant isotope of zinc, is very susceptible to neutron activation, being transmuted into the highly radioactive , which has a half-life of 244 days and produces intense gamma radiation.
The Rasaratna Samuccaya, written in approximately the 13th century AD, mentions two types of zinc-containing ores: one used for metal extraction and another used for medicinal purposes.
has three excited states and  has two.
Brass is generally more ductile and stronger than copper, and has superior corrosion resistance.
In stronger alkaline solutions, this hydroxide is dissolved to form zincates ().
RDA for lactation equals 12&nbsp;mg/day.
Zinc mines at Zawar, near Udaipur in India, have been active since the Mauryan period.
Commercially pure zinc is known as Special High Grade, often abbreviated ''SHG'', and is 99.995% pure.
The zinc vapor is collected in a condenser.
A 2006 study estimated that about 10% of human proteins (2800) potentially bind zinc, in addition to hundreds more that transport and traffic zinc; a similar ''in silico'' study in the plant ''Arabidopsis thaliana'' found 2367 zinc-related proteins.
Judean brass from the 14th to 10th centuries&nbsp;BC contains 23% zinc.
Complexes of zinc are mostly 4- or 6- coordinate although 5-coordinate complexes are known.
Zinc is an essential mineral perceived by the public today as being of "exceptional biologic and public health importance", especially regarding prenatal and postnatal development.
Paper is dipped in the solution and dried at 100*C. One drop of the sample is dropped onto the dry paper and heated.
Another patient who ingested 12&nbsp;grams of zinc showed only lethargy and ataxia (gross lack of coordination of muscle movements).
RDAs are higher than EARs so as to identify amounts that will cover people with higher than average requirements.
Carboxypeptidase cleaves peptide linkages during digestion of proteins.
Metallothionein in intestinal cells is capable of adjusting absorption of zinc by 15–40%.
Similarly,  (0.6%), with a half-life of  is not usually considered to be radioactive.
Excessive absorption of zinc suppresses copper and iron absorption.
About 1.1 million tonnes of metallic zinc and 130 thousand tonnes of lead were mined and smelted in the Belgian towns of La Calamine and Plombières between 1806 and 1882.
:2 ZnS + 3  → 2 ZnO + 2
Excess zinc is toxic to plants, although zinc toxicity is far less widespread.
When a compressed mixture of 70% zinc and 30% sulfur powder is ignited there is a violent chemical reaction.
Roughly one quarter of all zinc output in the United States in 2009 was consumed in zinc compounds; a variety of which are used industrially.
These alloys are marketed under the name Zamak.
Extremely pure zinc reacts only slowly at room temperature with acids.
Zinc was distinctly recognized as a metal under the designation of ''Yasada'' or Jasada in the medical Lexicon ascribed to the Hindu king Madanapala and written about the year 1374.
In aqueous solution an octahedral complex,  is the predominant species.
For building facades, roofing, and other applications for sheet metal formed by deep drawing, roll forming, or bending, zinc alloys with titanium and copper are used.
It is also suspected of being beneficial to the human immune system, and deficiency may be deleterious to virtually all parts of the system.
Chalcophiles formed as the crust solidified under the reducing conditions of the early Earth's atmosphere.
A widely used zinc alloy is brass, in which copper is alloyed with anywhere from 3% to 45% zinc, depending upon the type of brass.
Diethylzinc () is a reagent in synthetic chemistry.
Refinement of sulfidic zinc ores produces large volumes of sulfur dioxide and cadmium vapor.
Calculations indicate that a zinc compound with the oxidation state of +4 is unlikely to exist.
It is "typically the second most abundant transition metal in organisms" after iron and it is the only metal which appears in all enzyme classes.
Powdered zinc is used in this way in alkaline batteries and the case (which also serves as the anode) of zinc–carbon batteries is formed from sheet zinc.
The sulfuric acid is regenerated and recycled to the leaching step.
The name of the metal was probably first documented by Paracelsus, a Swiss-born German alchemist, who referred to the metal as "zincum" or "zinken" in his book ''Liber Mineralium II'', in the 16th century.
Zinc is a bluish-white, lustrous, diamagnetic metal, though most common commercial grades of the metal have a dull finish.
Work by Luigi Galvani and Alessandro Volta uncovered the electrochemical properties of zinc by 1800.
However, a study published in 2008 determined that zinc glycinate is the most readily absorbed of the four available dietary supplement compounds.
The metal was also called Indian tin, tutanego, calamine, and spinter.
Cobalticyanide paper (Rinnmann's test for Zn) can be used as a chemical indicator for zinc.
Stomach acid contains hydrochloric acid, in which metallic zinc dissolves readily to give corrosive zinc chloride.
A bar of zinc generates a characteristic sound when bent, similar to tin cry.
Zinc is added to the soil primarily through the weathering of rocks, but humans have added zinc through fossil fuel combustion, mine waste, phosphate fertilizers, pesticide (zinc phosphide), limestone, manure, sewage sludge, and particles from galvanized surfaces.
In Britain, John Lane is said to have carried out experiments to smelt zinc, probably at Landore, prior to his bankruptcy in 1726.
Brass, an alloy of copper and zinc in various proportions, was used as early as the third millennium BC in the Aegean, Iraq, the United Arab Emirates, Kalmykia, Turkmenistan and Georgia, and the second millennium BC in West India, Uzbekistan, Iran, Syria, Iraq, and Israel (Judea).
:2  + 2  → 2 Zn + 2  +
As for safety, the Food and Nutrition Board also sets Tolerable Upper Intake Levels (known as ULs) for vitamins and minerals when evidence is sufficient.
RDA for pregnancy equals 11&nbsp;mg/day.
Zinc in such remnants in smelting ovens was usually discarded as it was thought to be worthless.
''Zink'' could also imply "tin-like" because of its relation to German ''zinn'' meaning tin.
Champion's process was used through 1851.
In his 1746 experiment, Marggraf heated a mixture of calamine and charcoal in a closed vessel without copper to obtain a metal.
This layer helps prevent further reaction with air and water.
The concentration of zinc in plants varies with the level in the soil.
The world's largest zinc producer is Nyrstar, a merger of the Australian OZ Minerals and the Belgian Umicore.
This helps to create a hydrophobic pocket on the enzyme near the zinc, which attracts the non-polar part of the protein being digested.
However, it has been called "the brain's dark horse" because it also can be a neurotoxin, suggesting zinc homeostasis plays a critical role in normal functioning of the brain and central nervous system.
One of the simplest examples of an organic compound of zinc is the acetate ().
Zinc is a common ingredient of denture cream which may contain between 17 and 38&nbsp;mg of zinc per gram.
Effective sewage treatment greatly reduces this; treatment along the Rhine, for example, has decreased zinc levels to 50&nbsp;ppb.
64Zn is the most abundant isotope (48.63% natural abundance).
Zinc is an efficient Lewis acid, making it a useful catalytic agent in hydroxylation and other enzymatic reactions.
Zinc is the primary metal in American one cent coins (pennies) since 1982.
Soils contaminated with zinc from mining, refining, or fertilizing with zinc-bearing sludge can contain several grams of zinc per kilogram of dry soil.
Yet another possibility is that the word is derived from the Persian word  ''seng'' meaning stone.
Zinc supplement is an effective treatment for acrodermatitis enteropathica, a genetic disorder affecting zinc absorption that was previously fatal to affected infants.
The element is normally found in association with other base metals such as copper and lead in ores.
However, phytates in many whole-grains and fibers may interfere with zinc absorption and marginal zinc intake has poorly understood effects.
Zinc sheet metal is used to make zinc bars.
However, zinc supplements should not be administered alone, because many in the developing world have several deficiencies, and zinc interacts with other micronutrients.
The Chinese did not learn of the technique until the 17th century.
It plays a key role in synaptic plasticity and so in learning.
These considerations must be balanced against the paucity of adequate zinc biomarkers, and the most widely used indicator, plasma zinc, has poor sensitivity and specificity.
The current EARs for zinc for women and men ages 14 and up are 6.8&nbsp;mg/day and 9.4&nbsp;mg/day, respectively.
Organozinc compounds are those that contain zinc–carbon covalent bonds.
The Food and Nutrition Board of the U.S. Institute of Medicine updated Estimated Average Requirements (EARs) and Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for zinc in 2001.
A green disc indicates the presence of zinc.
Animals with a zinc deficiency require twice as much food to attain the same weight gain as animals with sufficient zinc.
Zinc-deficient soil is cultivated in the cropland of about half of Turkey and India, a third of China, and most of Western Australia.
When galvanised feedstock is fed to an electric arc furnace, the zinc is recovered from the dust by a number of processes, predominately the Waelz process (90% as of 2014).
In children, deficiency causes growth retardation, delayed sexual maturation, infection susceptibility, and diarrhea.
Zinc acts as the anode (negative terminus) by slowly corroding away as it passes electric current to the steel pipeline.
Other widely used zinc alloys include nickel silver, typewriter metal, soft and aluminium solder, and commercial bronze.
Anthropogenic and natural emissions occur at a ratio of 20&nbsp;to&nbsp;1.
The metal is hard and brittle at most temperatures but becomes malleable between 100 and 150&nbsp;°C.
Zinc oxide is widely used as a white pigment in paints and as a catalyst in the manufacture of rubber to disburse heat.
Symptoms of mild zinc deficiency are diverse.
About 70% of the world's zinc originates from mining, while the remaining 30% comes from recycling secondary zinc.
A variety of zinc compounds are commonly used, such as zinc carbonate and zinc gluconate (as dietary supplements), zinc chloride (in deodorants), zinc pyrithione (anti-dandruff shampoos), zinc sulfide (in luminescent paints), and zinc methyl or zinc diethyl in the organic laboratory.
In proteins, Zinc ions are often coordinated to the amino acid side chains of aspartic acid, glutamic acid, cysteine and histidine.
Zinc(I) compounds are rare and require bulky ligands to stabilize the low oxidation state.
In 2011, researchers at John Jay College of Criminal Justice reported that dietary zinc supplements can mask the presence of drugs in urine.
Zinc serves as a simple, inexpensive, and critical tool for treating diarrheal episodes among children in the developing world.
China produced 38% of the global zinc output in 2014.
About two thousand years ago, emissions of zinc from mining and smelting totaled 10 thousand tonnes a year.
This may refer to small quantities of zinc that is a by-product of smelting sulfide ores.
Swallowing a post-1982 American one cent piece (97.5% zinc) can cause damage to the stomach lining through the high solubility of the zinc ion in the acidic stomach.
In most single-tablet, over-the-counter, daily vitamin and mineral supplements, zinc is included in such forms as zinc oxide, zinc acetate, or zinc gluconate.
For women, 17% consumed less than the EAR, for men 11%.
In studies of zinc supplements and the common cold, zinc acetate produced the most positive results, apparently because acetate does not bind zinc ions.
Zinc dithiocarbamate complexes are used as agricultural fungicides; these include Zineb, Metiram, Propineb and Ziram.
It is the first element in group 12 of the periodic table.
The ore is finely ground, then put through froth flotation to separate minerals from gangue (on the property of hydrophobicity), to get a zinc sulfide ore concentrate consisting of about 50% zinc, 32% sulfur, 13% iron, and 5% .
The smelting of metallic zinc here, however, appears to have begun around the 12th century AD.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) states that zinc damages nerve receptors in the nose, causing anosmia.
This concept is well supported by data from the United States Geological Survey (USGS), which illustrates that although refined zinc production increased 80% between 1990 and 2010, the reserve lifetime for zinc has remained unchanged.
No compounds of zinc in oxidation states other than +1 or +2 are known.
It is used in the manufacture of other chemicals.
The sulfur dioxide is used for the production of sulfuric acid, which is necessary for the leaching process.
Soil contains zinc in 5–770&nbsp;ppm with an average 64&nbsp;ppm.
Zinc metal is produced using extractive metallurgy.
Zinc serves a purely structural role in zinc fingers, twists and clusters.
A similar antagonism exists with copper.
Postlewayt's ''Universal Dictionary'', a contemporary source giving technological information in Europe, did not mention zinc before 1751 but the element was studied before then.
Zinc reserves, on the other hand, are geologically identified ore bodies whose suitability for recovery is economically based (location, grade, quality, and quantity) at the time of determination.
(More reactive lithium (SEP −3.04 V) is used for anodes in lithium batteries ).
Zinc deficiency appears to be the most common micronutrient deficiency in crop plants; it is particularly common in high-pH soils.
A 1987 study found that zinc picolinate was better absorbed than zinc gluconate or zinc citrate.
Without this enzyme, this conversion would occur about one million times slower at the normal blood pH of 7 or would require a pH of 10 or more.
Pennies and other small coins are sometimes ingested by dogs, requiring veterinary removal of the foreign objects.
Zinc was regularly imported to Europe from the Orient in the 17th and early 18th centuries, but was at times very expensive.
Zinc is the 24th most abundant element in Earth's crust and has five stable isotopes.
Zinc may be held in metallothionein reserves within microorganisms or in the intestines or liver of animals.
Other source minerals for zinc include smithsonite (zinc carbonate), hemimorphite (zinc silicate), wurtzite (another zinc sulfide), and sometimes hydrozincite (basic zinc carbonate).
Zinc deficiency has been associated with major depressive disorder (MDD), and zinc supplements may be an effective treatment.
Another alloy, marketed under the brand name Prestal, contains 78% zinc and 22% aluminium, and is reported to be nearly as strong as steel but as malleable as plastic.
Semen is particularly rich in zinc, a key factor in prostate gland function and reproductive organ growth.
The oxide ZnO is a white powder that is nearly insoluble in neutral aqueous solutions, but is amphoteric, dissolving in both strong basic and acidic solutions.
One estimate is that this location produced an estimated million tonnes of metallic zinc and zinc oxide from the 12th to 16th centuries.
The Charaka Samhita, thought to have been written between 300 and 500 AD,  mentions a metal which, when oxidized, produces ''pushpanjan'', thought to be zinc oxide.
With a standard electrode potential (SEP) of −0.76 volts, zinc is used as an anode material for batteries.
Alchemists burned zinc in air to form what they called "philosopher's wool" or "white snow".
The equations below describe this process:
The Free Ion Activity Model is well-established in the literature, and shows that just micromolar amounts of the free ion kills some organisms.
The free zinc ion in solution is highly toxic to plants, invertebrates, and even vertebrate fish.
In 1982, the US Mint began minting pennies coated in copper but containing primarily zinc.
The theoretical and computational description of this zinc binding in proteins (as well as that of other transition metals) is difficult.
Animal-sourced foods (meat, fish, shellfish, fowl, eggs, dairy) provide zinc.
Zinc fingers form parts of some transcription factors, which are proteins that recognize DNA base sequences during the replication and transcription of DNA.
The percentages below EAR increased with age.
Zinc also helps speed up the healing process after an injury.
The volatilization of zinc in combination with zinc chloride at temperatures above 285&nbsp;°C indicates the formation of , a zinc compound with a +1 oxidation state.
A possibly prehistoric statuette containing 87.5% zinc was found in a Dacian archaeological site.
