Shas has supported territorial compromise with the Arabs and Palestinians, but it generally opposes compromise over Jewish holy sites.
Major aspects of the Zionist idea are represented in the Israeli Declaration of Independence:
According to Herzl's private diary notes, the Cardinal agreed on the history of Israel being the same as the one of the Catholic Church, but asked beforehand for a conversion of Jews to Catholicism.
Many Haredi Orthodox organizations oppose Zionism; they view Zionism as a secular movement.
After Herzl died in 1904, the Congress decided on the fourth day of its seventh session in July 1905 to decline the British offer and, according to Adam Rovner, "direct all future settlement efforts solely to Palestine".
A temperate climate due to its high elevation, was thought to be suitable for European settlement.
Labor Zionism became the dominant force in the political and economic life of the Yishuv during the British Mandate of Palestine and was the dominant ideology of the political establishment in Israel until the 1977 election when the Israeli Labor Party was defeated.
Arab countries sought to associate Zionism with racism in connection with a 2001 UN conference on racism, which took place in Durban, South Africa, which caused the United States and Israel to walk away from the conference as a response.
A 1920 German version renamed them "The Zionist Protocols".
In 1933, Hitler came to power in Germany, and in 1935 the Nuremberg Laws made German Jews (and later Austrian and Czech Jews) stateless refugees.
However, the Palestinian Arabs and the Arab states rejected the UN decision, demanding a single state and removal of Jewish migrants, leading to the 1948 Arab–Israeli War.
He cites the example of Ahad Ha'am, who after visiting Palestine in 1891, published a series of articles criticizing the aggressive behaviour and political ethnocentrism of Zionist settlers.
The multi-national, worldwide Zionist movement is structured on representative democratic principles.
In 1842, Smith sent Orson Hyde, an Apostle of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, to Jerusalem to dedicate the land for the return of the Jews.
This has invited attacks on the Hindutva movement by parts of the Indian left opposed to Zionism, and allegations that Hindus are conspiring with the "Jewish Lobby."
So-called "assimilationist" Jews desired complete integration into European society.
"open Muslim minds across the world to understand the democratic nature of the state of Israel, especially in the Middle East".
In their view a Jewish state is considered an oxymoron.
In its early stages, supporters considered setting up a Jewish state in the historic territory of  Palestine.
These early Jewish nation building efforts of Cresson, Benisch, Steinschneider and Noah failed.
The commission did not consider the situation of Jews in Europe, but called for a two-state solution and compulsory transfer of populations.
Unlike Herzl, the founder of political Zionism, Ahad Ha'am strived for Israel to be "a Jewish state and not merely a state of Jews".
Anti-German articles, such as the ''Daily Express'' calling for an "Anti-Nazi boycott", in response to German antisemitism were published prior to Adolf Hitler's rise, as well.
The purpose of the visit was to promote meaningful debate about the status of Israel in the eyes of Muslims worldwide, and to strengthen the relationship between India and Israel.
Congresses are held every four years (they were held every two years before the Second World War) and delegates to the congress are elected by the membership.
In 1975, the United Nations General Assembly passed a resolution that designated Zionism as "a form of racism and racial discrimination".
One particular version of these allegations, "The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" (subtitle "Protocols extracted from the secret archives of the central chancery of Zion") achieved global notability.
The new country's immigration policy had some opposition within the new Israeli government, such as those who argued that there was "no justification for organizing large-scale emigration among Jews whose lives were not in danger, particularly when the desire and motivation were not their own" as well as those who argued that the absorption process caused "undue hardship".
The Holocaust united much of the rest of world Jewry behind the Zionist project.
Theodor Herzl, the ideological father of Zionism, considered Antisemitism as an eternal feature of all societies in which Jews lived as minorities, and that only a separation could allow Jews to escape eternal prosecution.
Zionism was conceived by Jabotinsky not as the return of the Jews to their spiritual homeland but as an offshoot or implant of Western civilization in the East.
The common denominator among all Zionists is the claim to Eretz Israel as the national homeland of the Jews and as the legitimate focus for Jewish national self-determination.
The Jews should not be permitted to return to Palestine with sovereignty: "According to the Sacred Scriptures, the Jewish people must always live dispersed and vagabondo vagrant, wandering among the other nations, so that they may render witness to Christ not only by the Scriptures&nbsp;... but by their very existence".
The term "Zionism" is derived from the word Zion (), referring to Jerusalem.
Given Russia's anti-semitism, at the start of World War I, most Jews (and Zionists) supported Germany in its war with Russia.
The following year, congress sent a delegation to inspect the plateau.
It has provided political support for Israel in other countries but plays little role in internal Israeli politics.
They argued that a revolution of the Jewish soul and society was necessary and achievable in part by Jews moving to Israel and becoming farmers, workers, and soldiers in a country of their own.
* Protection of Jewish rights everywhere
This planned to end Jewish immigration by 1944 and to allow no more than 75,000 additional Jewish migrants.
Similarly, an exhibit about Zionism and Israel in the former Museum of Religion and Atheism in Saint Petersburg designated the following as Soviet Zionist material: Jewish prayer shawls, ''tefillin'' and Passover'' Hagaddahs'', even though these are all ''religious'' items used by Jews for thousands of years.
Zionism had also been opposed by some Jews for other reasons even before the establishment of the state of Israel because "Zionism constitutes a danger, spiritual and physical, to the existence of our people.'.".
The resolution was repealed in 1991 by replacing Resolution 3379 with United Nations General Assembly Resolution 46/86.
Kadima, the main centrist party during the 2000s that is now defunct, however, did identify with many of the fundamental policies of Liberal Zionist ideology, advocating among other things the need for Palestinian statehood in order to form a more democratic society in Israel, affirming the free market, and calling for equal rights for Arab citizens of Israel.
Parallels have also been drawn between aspects of South Africa's apartheid regime and certain Israeli policies toward the Palestinians, which are seen as manifestations of racism in Zionist thinking.
Brigitte Gabriel, a Lebanese-born Christian US journalist and founder of the American Congress for Truth, urges Americans to "fearlessly speak out in defense of America, Israel and Western civilization".
Martin Luther King, Jr. was a strong supporter of Israel and Zionism, although the Letter to an Anti-Zionist Friend is a work falsely attributed to him.
Zionists sometimes refused to speak Yiddish, a language they thought had developed in the context of European persecution.
The initial response of the Catholic Church seemed to be one of strong opposition to Zionism.
Hebrew was preferred not only for ideological reasons, but also because it allowed all citizens of the new state to have a common language, thus furthering the political and cultural bonds among Zionists.
After a second trial, based on the centrality of American 'freedom of faith' issues and antisemitism, Cresson won the bitterly contested suit.
This view diverges from other New Historians, such as Benny Morris, who accept the Palestinian exodus narrative but place it in the context of war, not ethnic cleansing.
The Philadelphia Conference, 1869, followed the lead of the German rabbis and decreed that the Messianic hope of Israel is "the union of all the children of God in the confession of the unity of God".
They and many of their descendants remain refugees.
These two outcomes represent the historical success of Zionism, and are unmatched by any other Jewish political movement in the past 2,000 years.
Britain was responsible for the Palestinian mandate and, after the Balfour Declaration, it supported Jewish immigration in principle.
It is suggested that the visit could
After World War II and the destruction of Jewish life in Central and Eastern Europe where these alternative movements were rooted, it became dominant in thinking about a Jewish national state.
However, others like C H Spurgeon, both Horatius and Andrew Bonar, Robert Murray M'Chyene, and J C Ryle were among a number of prominent proponents of both the importance and significance of a Jewish return, who were not dispensationalist.
However, critics of Zionism consider it a colonialist or racist movement.
But they allow members to participate in Israeli political life, including both passive and active participation in elections.
he proclaimed exposing his plan.
Others reject any possibility of a Jewish state, since according to them a Jewish state is completely forbidden by Jewish religious law.
Jewish settlements were established in the upper Mississippi region by W.D.
"Cultural synthesists" emphasized both a need to maintain traditional Jewish values and faith, and a need to conform to a modernist society, for instance, in complying with work days and rules.
In his view, the current State of Israel is contrariwise to Judaism, because it was founded by people who included some anti-religious personalities, and were in apparent violation of the traditional notion that Jews should wait for the Jewish Messiah.
Jewish migration to Palestine and widespread Jewish land purchases from feudal landlords contributed to landlessness among Palestinian Arabs, fueling unrest.
The Neturei Karta, an Orthodox Haredi religious movement, strongly oppose Zionism, considering Israel a "racist regime".
Political support for the Jewish return to the Land of Israel predates the formal organization of Jewish Zionism as a political movement.
Sir Moses Montefiore, famous for his intervention in favor of Jews around the world, including the attempt to rescue Edgardo Mortara, established a colony for Jews in Palestine.
Since the creation of modern Israel, the role of the movement has declined.
He preferred Argentina for its vast and sparsely populated territory and temperate climate, but conceded that Palestine would have greater attraction because of the historic ties of Jews with that area.
This initial attitude changed over the next 50 years, until 1997, when at the Vatican symposium of that year, Pope John Paul II rejected the Christian roots of antisemitism, expressing that "...&nbsp;the wrong and unjust interpretations of the New Testament relating to the Jewish people and their supposed guilt in Christ's death circulated for too long, engendering sentiments of hostility toward this people."
by Pappé, Ilan (Zochrot) "the important point is a growing consensus among Israeli and Palestinian historians about the Israeli expulsion of the Palestinians in 1948 (expulsion and the destruction of villages and towns)" (...) "The gist of the common ground is a consensus between the 'new historians' in Israel and many Palestinian historians that Israel bore the main responsibility for the making of the problem."
Montefiore was appointed executor of his will, and used the funds for a variety of projects, including building in 1860 the first Jewish residential settlement and almshouse outside of the old walled city of Jerusalem—today known as ''Mishkenot Sha'ananim.''
A human rights forum arranged in connection with the conference, on the other hand, did equate Zionism with racism and censured Israel for what it called "racist crimes, including acts of genocide and ethnic cleansing".
The subsequent departure of the JTO from the Zionist Organization had little impact.
Edward Said and Michael Prior claim that the notion of expelling the Palestinians was an early component of Zionism, citing Herzl's diary from 1895 which states "we shall endeavour to expel the poor population across the border unnoticed&nbsp;— the process of expropriation and the removal of the poor must be carried out discreetly and circumspectly."
Some writers have claimed that this was done in order to get more Muslim votes in India (where Muslims numbered over 30 million at the time).
In more current times, conservative Indian parties and organizations tend to support Zionism.
Shlaim balances this by pointing out that there have always been individuals within the Zionist movement that have criticized such attitudes.
After the 1st century Great Revolt and the 2nd century Bar Kokhba revolt, the Roman Empire expelled the Jews from Judea, changing the name to ''Syria Palaestina.''
This led to the rise of two antagonistic movements: neo-Zionism and post-Zionism.
I know that this term is completely negative in the discourse of the 21st century, but when the choice is between ethnic cleansing and genocide - the annihilation of your people - I prefer ethnic cleansing."
Some Indian Muslims have also expressed opposition to Islamic anti-Zionism.
Since the establishment of the State of Israel in 1948, Zionism continues primarily to advocate on behalf of Israel and address threats to its continued existence and security.
This has lent to the conspiracy theory that Jews started the holocaust, although Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels was largely responsible for ignoring the patriotic Jew, and instead promoting anti-German materials as "evidence" that the Jews needed to be eradicated.
Critics of Zionism view it as a colonialist, racist and exceptionalist ideology that led advocates to violence during Mandatory Palestine, followed by the forced exodus of Palestinians, and the subsequent denial of their human rights.
The resolution was robustly criticised by the US representative, Daniel Patrick Moynihan as an 'obscenity' and a 'harm ...done to the United Nations'.
Their ideology revolves around three pillars: the Land of Israel, the People of Israel and the Torah of Israel.
At the end of the 19th century, Jews were a small minority in Palestine.
They are sometimes associated with views that could be regarded as nationalist or Zionist.
The resolution named the occupied territory of Palestine, Zimbabwe, and South Africa as examples of racist regimes.
He also accepted to evaluate Joseph Chamberlain's proposal for possible Jewish settlement in Great Britain's East African colonies.
Furthermore, they stressed self-sufficiency, which became an important aspect of Labor Zionism.
However, the force of Ben-Gurion's influence and insistence ensured that his immigration policy was carried out.
Those in favor of cultural synthesis desired continuity and only moderate evolution, and were concerned that Jews should not lose their identity as a people.
The Russian Orthodox ideologue Hippolytus Lutostansky, also known as the author of multiple antisemitic tracts, insisted in 1911 that Russian Jews should be "helped" to move to Palestine "as their rightful place is in their former kingdom of Palestine".
In 1975 the UN General Assembly passed Resolution 3379, which said "Zionism is a form of racism and racial discrimination".
* Ingathering of the Jewish People in its historic homeland, Eretz Israel, through Aliyah from all countries
Zionist success in winning British support for the formation of a Jewish National Home in Palestine helped inspire the Jamaican Black nationalist Marcus Garvey to form a movement dedicated to returning Americans of African origin to Africa.
The protocols are fictional minutes of an imaginary meeting by Jewish leaders of this plot.
The return of the Jews to the Holy Land was widely supported by such eminent figures as Queen Victoria, Napoleon Bonaparte, King Edward VII, President John Adams of the United States, General Smuts of South Africa, President Masaryk of Czechoslovakia, philosopher and historian Benedetto Croce from Italy, Henry Dunant (founder of the Red Cross and author of the Geneva Conventions), and scientist and humanitarian Fridtjof Nansen from Norway.
Zionism also sought assimilation of Jews into the modern world.
Were they expelled?
This partition plan was adopted on November 29, 1947 with UN GA Resolution 181, 33 votes in favor, 13 against, and 10 abstentions.
The final text of the conference did not connect Zionism with racism.
According to Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, Eretz Israel is a land promised to the Jews by God according to the Hebrew and Greek Bibles and the Quran, respectively.
They asserted that only a lunatic would convert to Judaism from Christianity.
Martin Luther King Jr. condemned anti-Zionism as antisemitic.
Herzl's aim was to initiate necessary preparatory steps for the development of a Jewish state.
Upon the German adoption of the swastika, Theodore Newman Kaufman, bent on provoking a race war and eliminating his perception of "inbred Germanism", published ''Germany Must Perish!''
'In 1991 the resolution was repealed with UN General Assembly Resolution 46/86, after Israel declared that it would only participate in the Madrid Conference of 1991 if the resolution were revoked.
Neo-Zionism and post-Zionism share traits with "classical" Zionism but differ by accentuating antagonist and diametrically opposed poles already present in Zionism.
Other opponent groups among the Edah HaChareidis were Dushinsky, Toldos Aharon, Toldos Avrohom Yitzchok, Spinka, and others.
A less radical form of assimilation was called cultural synthesis.
Although initially one of several Jewish political movements offering alternative responses to assimilation and antisemitism, Zionism expanded rapidly.
According to Teitelbaum, the second oath is relevant concerning the subsequent wars fought between Israel and Arab nations.
The movement was eventually successful in establishing Israel on May 14, 1948 (5 Iyyar 5708 in the Hebrew calendar), as the homeland for the Jewish people.
However, some Haredi movements (such as Shas since 2010) do openly affiliate with the Zionist movement.
On May 14, 1948, at the end of the British mandate, the Jewish Agency, led by David Ben-Gurion, declared the creation of the State of Israel, and the same day the armies of seven Arab countries invaded Israel.
"Let them give us sovereignty over a piece of the Earth's surface, just sufficient for the needs of our people, then we will do the rest!"
In the last years of his life, the founder of the Latter Day Saint movement, Joseph Smith, declared, "the time for Jews to return to the land of Israel is now."
Socialist Zionists believed that centuries of oppression in antisemitic societies had reduced Jews to a meek, vulnerable, despairing existence that invited further antisemitism, a view originally stipulated by Theodor Herzl.
The Israeli Labor Party continues the tradition, although the most popular party in the kibbutzim is Meretz.
In the United States, Mordecai Noah attempted to establish a Jewish refuge opposite Buffalo, New York on Grand Isle, 1825.
One of the best known Hasidic opponents of all forms of modern political Zionism was Hungarian rebbe and Talmudic scholar Joel Teitelbaum.
Nonetheless, Theodore Herzl travelled to Rome in late January 1904, after the sixth Zionist Congress (August 1903) and six months before his death, looking for some kind of support.
Later, a series of laws passed by the first Israeli government prevented Palestinians from returning to their homes, or claiming their property.
Derek Penslar says that Herzl may have been considering either South America or Palestine when he wrote the diary entry about expropriation.
Three days later, Herzl met Pope Pius X, who replied to his request of support for a Jewish return to Israel in the same terms, saying that "we are unable to favor this movement.
They prefer coalitions with more nationalist Zionist parties, probably because these are more interested in enhancing the Jewish nature of the Israeli state.
The Jewish Agency for Palestine under the leadership of David Ben-Gurion increasingly dictated policy with support from American Zionists who provided funding and influence in Washington, D.C., including via the highly effective American Palestine Committee.
* Strengthening of the State of Israel, based on the prophetic vision of justice and peace
When Benny Morris was asked about the Expulsion of Palestinians from Lydda and Ramle, he responded "There are circumstances in history that justify ethnic cleansing.
Similar rules were applied by the many Nazi allies in Europe.
The Bar Kokhba revolt caused a spike in antisemitism and Jewish persecution.
But they take responsibility for ensuring that Jews maintain religious ideals and, since most Israeli citizens are Jews, they pursue this agenda within Israel.
Once they moved to Israel, many Zionists refused to speak their (diasporic) mother tongues and adopted new, Hebrew names.
The British, having faced the 1936–1939 Arab revolt against mass Jewish immigration into Palestine, were now facing opposition by Zionist groups in Palestine for subsequent restrictions.
However, the area was populated by a large number of Maasai, who did not seem to favour an influx of Europeans.
Some Arab Christians publicly supporting Israel include US author Nonie Darwish, and former Muslim Magdi Allam, author of ''Viva Israele'', both born in Egypt.
Cresson was tried and condemned for lunacy in a suit filed by his wife and son.
Between the 4th and 19th centuries, Nasi's was the only practical attempt to establish some sort of Jewish political center in Palestine.
The official beginning of the construction of the New Yishuv in Palestine is usually dated to the arrival of the Bilu group in 1882, who commenced the First Aliyah.
It was decided to send a commission to investigate the proposed land by 295 to 177 votes, with 132 abstaining.
The alliance with Britain was strained as the latter realized the implications of the Jewish movement for Arabs in Palestine but the Zionists persisted.
Britain established the Peel Commission to investigate the situation.
It has always avoided association with the Zionist movement and usually avoids voting on or discussing issues related to peace, because its members do not serve in the army.
These groups were collectively called the "Lovers of Zion" and were seen to encounter a growing Jewish movement toward assimilation.
A variety of Zionism, called cultural Zionism, founded and represented most prominently by Ahad Ha'am, fostered a secular vision of a Jewish "spiritual center" in Israel.
Ha Kivshbnim Maashimim' ('The Holocaust Victims Accuse'), serves as an attempt to show, by means of testimonies., documents and reports, how Zionism and its high-level organizations brought a catastrophe upon our people during the era of the Nazi holocaust."
Since the first centuries CE, most Jews have lived outside the Land of Israel (Eretz Israel, better known as Palestine), although there has been a constant minority presence of Jews.
Most immigrants came from the Russian Empire, escaping the frequent pogroms and state-led persecution in what are now Ukraine and Poland.
The Diaspora began in 586 BCE during the Babylonian occupation of Israel.
To avoid accusations of antisemitism, the Palestine Liberation Organization has historically avoided using the word "Jewish" in favor using "Zionist," though PLO officials have sometimes slipped.
Saleh Abdel Jawad, Nur Masalha, Michael Prior, Ian Lustick, and John Rose have criticized Zionism for having been responsible for violence against Palestinians, such as the Deir Yassin massacre, Sabra and Shatila massacre, and Cave of the Patriarchs massacre.
Zionism does not have a uniform ideology, but has evolved in a dialogue among a plethora of ideologies: General Zionism, Religious Zionism, Labor Zionism, Revisionist Zionism, Green Zionism, etc.
Until 1917, the World Zionist Organization pursued a strategy of building a Jewish National Home through persistent small-scale immigration and the founding of such bodies as the Jewish National Fund (1901&nbsp;— a charity that bought land for Jewish settlement) and the Anglo-Palestine Bank (1903&nbsp;— provided loans for Jewish businesses and farmers).
Until 1948, the primary goals of Zionism were the re-establishment of Jewish sovereignty in the Land of Israel, ingathering of the exiles, and liberation of Jews from the antisemitic discrimination and persecution that they experienced during their diaspora.
But they also think that this state must be a liberal democracy, which means that there must be strict equality before the law independent of religion, ethnicity or gender."
Even Theodor Herzl, the founder of political Zionism was initially content with any Jewish self-governed state.
Zionism, seen as a national liberation movement for the repatriation of the Jewish people to their homeland then under British colonial rule, appealed to many Hindu Nationalists, who viewed their struggle for independence from British rule and the Partition of India as national liberation for long-oppressed Hindus.
Notable early supporters of Zionism include British Prime Ministers David Lloyd George and Arthur Balfour, American President Woodrow Wilson and British Major-General Orde Wingate, whose activities in support of Zionism led the British Army to ban him from ever serving in Palestine.
They should seek to convert the Arab heart."
We cannot prevent the Jews going to Jerusalem, but we could never sanction it&nbsp;...
The vote led to celebrations in the streets of Jewish cities.
During a speech in Harlem in 1920, Garvey stated: "other races were engaged in seeing their cause through—the Jews through their Zionist movement and the Irish through their Irish movement—and I decided that, cost what it might, I would make this a favorable time to see the Negro's interest through."
As an alternative to Zionism, Soviet authorities established a Jewish Autonomous Oblast in 1934, which remains extant as the only autonomous oblast of Russia.
On the other hand, anti-Zionist writers such as Noam Chomsky, Norman Finkelstein, Michael Marder, and Tariq Ali have argued that the characterization of anti-Zionism as antisemitic is inaccurate, sometimes obscures legitimate criticism of Israel's policies and actions, and is sometimes a political ploy to stifle criticism of Israel.
Though socialist Zionism draws its inspiration and is philosophically founded on the fundamental values and spirituality of Judaism, its progressive expression of that Judaism has often fostered an antagonistic relationship with Orthodox Judaism.
The growth of the Jewish community in Palestine and the devastation of European Jewish life sidelined the World Zionist Organization.
It is based on historical ties and religious traditions linking the Jewish people to the Land of Israel.
According to Charles Merkley of Carleton University, Christian Zionism strengthened significantly after the Six-Day War of 1967, and many dispensationalist and non-dispensationalist evangelical Christians, especially in the United States, now strongly support Zionism.
Finally, Nasi was forced by the Ottoman Sultan Mehmed IV to visit him.
The British maintained this policy until the end of the Mandate.
After the Six-Day War and the capture of the West Bank, a territory referred to in Jewish terms as Judea and Samaria, right-wing components of the Religious Zionist movement integrated nationalist revindication and evolved into Neo-Zionism.
This is another area in which we shall set the entire world a wonderful example … Should there be many such immovable owners in individual areas who would not sell their property to us, we shall simply leave them there and develop our commerce in the direction of other areas which belong to us."
Throughout eastern Europe in the late 19th century, numerous grassroots groups were promoting the national resettlement of the Jews in their homeland, as well as the revitalization and cultivation of the Hebrew language.
The French government, through Minister M. Cambon, formally committed itself to "...&nbsp;the renaissance of the Jewish nationality in that Land from which the people of Israel were exiled so many centuries ago."
The immigration restrictions of the British White Paper of 1939 meant that such a plan could not be put into large scale effect until the Israeli Declaration of Independence in May 1948.
Ilan Pappe argued that Zionism results in ethnic cleansing.
'''Zionism''' ( ''Tsiyyonut''  after ''Zion'') is a nationalist political movement of Jews and Jewish culture that supports the re-establishment of a Jewish homeland in the territory defined as the historic Land of Israel (roughly corresponding to Palestine, Canaan or the Holy Land).
The party works to ensure that Israel and Israeli law are in tune with the halacha, on issues such as Shabbat rest.
In some academic studies, Zionism has been analyzed both within the larger context of diaspora politics and as an example of modern national liberation movements.
Some critics of anti-Zionism have argued that opposition to Zionism can be hard to distinguish from antisemitism, and that criticism of Israel may be used as an excuse to express viewpoints that might otherwise be considered antisemitic.
The kibbutz began as a variation on a "national farm" scheme, a form of cooperative agriculture where the Jewish National Fund hired Jewish workers under trained supervision.
The movement was democratic from its inception and women had the right to vote.
Since the creation of the State of Israel, the World Zionist Organization has functioned mainly as an organization dedicated to assisting and encouraging Jews to migrate to Israel.
Creating an alliance with Great Britain and securing support for some years for Jewish emigration to Palestine, Zionists also recruited among European Jews to immigrate there, especially in areas of the Russian Empire where anti-semitism was raging.
The non-Hasidic or 'Lithuanian' Haredi Ashkenazi world is represented by the Ashkenazi Agudat Israel/UTJ party.
As a result of the diaspora, many of the Jewish people remained outsiders within their adopted countries and became detached from modern ideas.
The movement equates Zionism to Nazism, believes that Zionist ideology is contrary to the teachings of the Torah, and also blames Zionism for increases in antisemitism.
During the last quarter of the 20th century, classic nationalism in Israel declined.
Additional Aliyahs followed the Russian Revolution and its eruption of violent pogroms, as well as the Nazi persecution of the 1930s.
The Russian Empire, with its long record of state-organized genocide and ethnic cleansing ("pogroms"), was widely regarded as the historic enemy of the Jewish people.
It is wrong and inhuman to impose the Jews on the Arabs&nbsp;...
At the congress, delegates elect a 30-man executive council, which in turn elects the movement's leader.
This was disastrous to European Jews already being gravely discriminated against and in need of a place to seek refuge.
Members are required to pay dues known as a ''shekel''.
