An online survey which recruited participants over the internet concluded that prior to the arrival of widespread computer networking, most zoophiles would not have known other zoophiles, and for the most part, zoophiles engaged in bestiality secretly, or told only trusted friends, family or partners.
RSV) are cited by Jewish, Christian, and Muslim theologians as categorical denunciation of bestiality.
Zoophiles will not usually seek help for their condition, and so do not come to the attention of psychiatrists for zoophilia itself.
Adult audiences should be informed as to what they will be viewing or hearing, and the young, who cannot make a fully informed choice for themselves, should be protected.
The law provides for sentences of up to two years in prison; a sentence of 12 months was handed down in one case in 2011.
The Cambridge Illustrated History of Prehistoric Art says the scene may be humorous, as the penetrating man seems to be waving cheerfully with his hand at the same time.
For example, Suzy Spark.
Nancy Friday notes that zoophilia as a fantasy may provide an escape from cultural expectations, restrictions, and judgements in regard to sex.
Furthermore, some zoophiles report that they have never had sexual contact with an animal.
Most people can tell if an animal does not like how it is being petted, because it will move away.
The depictions are largely symbolic depictions of the sexualization of some animals and are not meant to be taken literally.
By around 1992–1994, the wide social net had evolved.
The term ''zoosexual'' was proposed by Hani Miletski in 2002 as a value-neutral term.
The first detailed studies of zoophilia date from prior to 1910.
The HSUS takes the position that all sexual activity between humans and animals is abusive, whether it involves physical injury or not.
Singer and others have argued that people's dislike of bestiality is partly caused by irrational speciesism and anthropocentrism.
To those defending bestiality this is seen as a way in which animals give consent, or the fact that a dog might wag its tail.
Sexual fantasies about zoophilic acts can occur in people who do not have any wish to experience them in real life.
But he himself says pet owners will be unimpressed by this statement, as this is not news to them.
However, the word zoophilia is used to mean a sexual preference towards animals, which makes it  a paraphilia.
Arizona, Alaska and Florida now ban bestiality.
The newsgroup included information about health issues, laws governing zoophilia, bibliography relating to the subject, and community events.
Those particularly active on the internet may not be aware of a wider subculture, as there is not much of a wider subculture, Weinberg and Williams felt the virtual zoophile group would lead the development of the subculture.
'For years, I thought I was the only one who did this,' James says.
:* Society in general at present is considerably misinformed about zoophilia, its stereotypes, and its meaning.
Because of the diary-like intimacy of blogs and the anonymity of the internet, zoophiles had the ideal opportunity to "openly" express their sexuality.
Into the 1980s the Dutch took the lead, creating figures like "Wilma" and the "Dutch Sisters".
A frequent interest in and sexual excitement at watching animals mate is cited as an indicator of latent zoophilia by Massen (1994).
Masters (1962) says that some brothel madams used to stage exhibitions of animals mating, as they found it aroused potential clientele, and that this may have encouraged the clients to engage in bestiality..
:*Most zoophiles have (or have also had) long term human relationships as well or at the same time as zoosexual ones, and that zoosexual partners are usually dogs and/or horses (Masters, Miletski, Beetz)
As with all volunteer surveys and sexual ones in particular, these studies have a potential for self-selection bias.
In many jurisdictions, all forms of zoophilic acts are prohibited; others outlaw only the mistreatment of animals, without specific mention of sexual activity.
Under U.S. law, 'distribution' includes transmission across the Internet.
Countries such as Belgium and Sweden are somewhere in between: they permit sexual activity with animals, but prohibit the promotion of animal-oriented pornography.
... Laws which criminalize zoophilia based on societal abhorrence of such acts rather than any real harm caused by such acts are an unjust and unconstitutional infringement on individual liberty."
Zoophilia may reflect childhood experimentation, sexual abuse or lack of other avenues of sexual expression.
Arguments for and against zoosexual activity from a variety of sources, including religious, moral, ethical, psychological, medical and social.
Pornography of this sort has become the business of certain spammers such as Jeremy Jaynes and owners of some fake TGPs, who use the promise of "extreme" material as a bid for users' attention.
For instance, Jonathan Balcombe says animals do things for pleasure.
Therefore, sexual activity with animals is, in some instances, a high risk activity.
The promotion of "stars" began with the Danish Bodil Joensen, in the period of 1969–72, along with other porn actors such as the Americans Linda Lovelace (''Dogarama'', 1969), Chessie Moore (multiple films, c. 1994), Kerri Downs (three films, 1998) and Calina Lynx (aka Kelly G'raffe) (two films, 1998).
This was initially centered around the above-mentioned newsgroup, alt.sex.bestiality, which during the six years following 1990 had matured into a discussion and support group.
Notable legal views include Sweden, where a 2005 report by the Swedish Animal Welfare Agency for the government expressed concern over the increase in reports of horse-ripping incidents.
As with all accusations and confessions extracted under torture in the witch trials in Early Modern Europe, their validity cannot be ascertained.
Allergic reactions to animal semen may occur, including anaphylaxis.
Those supporting zoophilic activity feel animals sometimes even seem to enjoy the sexual attention or voluntarily initiate sexual activity with humans.
Until 2005, there was a farm near Enumclaw, Washington that was described as an “animal brothel”, where people paid to have sex with animals.
Bestiality is seen by the government of the United Kingdom as profoundly disturbed behavior (as indicated by the UK Home Office review on sexual offences in 2002).
Tactile zoophilesFetishistic zoophilesSadistic bestials
Animal owners normally know what their own pets like or do not like.
'This is not a fetish,' James says of his attractions.
To confine the 'right' of any animal strictly to acts of zoophilia is thus to make a law against zoophilia based not on reason but on moral prejudice, and to breach the constitutional rights of zoophiles to due process and equality before the law.
Zoophilia may also be covered to some degree by other fields such as ethics, philosophy, law, animal rights and animal welfare.
When such laws are proposed, they are never questioned or debated.
It was an extension of my affection for the dog and of my discovery of sex.
U.S. prohibitions on distribution of sexual or obscene materials are  in some doubt, having been ruled unconstitutional in ''United States v. Extreme Associates'' (a judgement which was overturned on appeal, December 2005).
Pu Songling refers to zoophilia in the ''Strange Tales from a Chinese Studio'' short story "The Fornicating Dog", which talks about sexual relations between a woman and her white dog.
Some zoonoses may be transferred through casual contact, but others are much more readily transferred by activities that expose humans to the semen, vaginal fluids, urine, saliva, feces and blood of animals.
Research has proven that non-human animals can and do have sex for non-reproductive purposes (and for pleasure).
Beetz also states the following:
'''Bestiality''' is cross-species sexual activity between human and non-human animals.
An argument from human dignity is given by Wesley J. Smith, a senior fellow and Intelligent Design proponent at the Center for Science and Culture of the conservative Christian Discovery Institute: – "such behavior is profoundly degrading and utterly subversive to the crucial understanding that human beings are unique, special, and of the highest moral worth in the known universe—a concept known as 'human exceptionalism' ... one of the reasons bestiality is condemned through law is that such degrading conduct unacceptably subverts standards of basic human dignity and is an affront to humankind's inestimable importance and intrinsic moral worth."
After an incident on 2 July 2005, when a man was pronounced dead in the emergency room of the Enumclaw community hospital after his colon ruptured due to having been sodomized by a horse, the farm garnered police attention.
I definitely knew I wasn't going to be talking to my parents or my friends about this.'...
Pindar, Herodotus, and Plutarch claimed the Egyptians engaged in ritual congress with goats.
A 1982 study suggested that 7.5 percent of 186 university students had interacted sexually with an animal.
The World Health Organization takes the same position, listing a sexual preference for animals in its ICD-10 as "other disorder of sexual preference".
Such claims about other cultures do not necessarily reflect anything about which the author had evidence, but be a form of propaganda or xenophobia, similar to blood libel.
Another early film to attain great infamy was "Animal Farm", smuggled into Great Britain around 1980 without details as to makers or provenance.
Usage of ''zoosexual'' as a noun (in reference to a person) is synonymous with zoophile, while the adjectival form of the word – as, for instance, in the phrase "zoosexual act" – may indicate sexual activity between a human and a non-human animal.
Confusing the matter yet further, writing in 1962, Masters used the term ''bestialist'' specifically in his discussion of zoosadism.
In the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), zoophilia is placed in the classification "other specified paraphilic disorder" ("paraphilias not otherwise specified" in the DSM-III and IV).
Material featuring sex with animals is widely available on the Internet, due to their ease of production, and because production and sale is legal in countries such as Denmark.
Today, in Hungary, where production faces no legal limitations, zoophilic materials have become a substantial industry that produces numerous films and magazines, particularly for Dutch companies such as ''Topscore'' and ''Book & Film International'', and the genre has stars such as "Hector", a Great Dane starring in several films.
Exclusive desire for animals rather than humans is considered a rare paraphilia, and sufferers often have other paraphilias with which they present.
The agency believed current animal cruelty legislation was not sufficient in protecting animals from abuse and needed updating, but concluded that on balance it was not appropriate to call for a ban.
Such procedures are probably more disturbing physically and psychologically than acts of zoophilia would be, yet the issue of consent on the part of the animal is never raised in the discussion of such procedures.
In a 1997 article, Piers Beirne, Professor of Criminology at the University of Southern Maine, points out that 'for genuine consent to sexual relations to be present...both participants must be conscious, fully informed and positive in their desires.'
In Kinsey’s day contacts between animal lovers were more localized and limited to male compatriots in a particular rural community.
In 2006, a Danish Animal Ethics Council report concluded that ethically performed zoosexual activity is capable of providing a positive experience for all participants, and that some non-human animals are sexually attracted to humans (for example, dolphins).
The term ''zoophilia'' was introduced into the field of research on sexuality in ''Psychopathia Sexualis'' (1886) by Krafft-Ebing, who described a number of cases of "violation of animals (bestiality)", as well as "zoophilia erotica", which he defined as a sexual attraction to animal skin or fur.
Masters said that since pre-historic man is prehistoric it goes without saying that we know little of his sexual behaviour, depictions in cave paintings may only show the artist's subjective preoccupations or thoughts.
His attraction to dogs became stronger in his teens and stronger yet in his 20s.
Additionally, zoophiles in categories 2, 3, and 8 (romantic zoophiles, zoophilic fantasizers, and regular zoophiles) are the most common, while zoophiles found in categories 6 and 7 (sadistic bestials and opportunistic zoophiles) are the least common.
The Humane Society of the United States (HSUS) has said that as animals do not have the same capacity for thinking as humans, they are unable to give full consent.
In Part II of his Summa Theologica, medieval philosopher Thomas Aquinas ranked various "unnatural vices" (sex acts resulting in "venereal pleasure" rather than procreation) by degrees of sinfulness, concluding that "the most grievous is the sin of bestiality."
Instances of this behavior have been found in the Bible.
The film was later traced to a crude juxtaposition of smuggled cuts from many of Bodil Joensen's 1970s Danish movies.
The state legislature of the State of Washington, which had been one of the few states in the United States without a law against bestiality, within six months passed a bill making bestiality illegal.
Beetz described the phenomenon of zoophilia/bestiality as being somewhere between crime, paraphilia and love, although she says that most research has been based on criminological reports, so the cases have frequently involved violence and psychiatric illness.
'When you're a kid, you're not really aware of too much sexually,' he says.
The love of animals is not necessarily sexual in nature.
The terms are often used interchangeably, but some researchers make a distinction between the attraction (zoophilia) and the act (bestiality).
In the Church-oriented culture of the Middle Ages zoophilic activity was met with execution, typically burning, and death to the animals involved either the same way or by hanging, as "both a violation of Biblical edicts and a degradation of man as a spiritual being rather than one that is purely animal and carnal."
Hence a watershed and other precautions were set up for explicit sexual material, to protect young people.
In the DSM-5, it rises to the level of a diagnosable disorder only when accompanied by distress or interference with normal functioning.
Laws on zoophilia are often triggered by specific incidents.
John Irving's novel ''The Cider House Rules'' repeatedly mentions a pornographic photograph depicting oral sex on a pony.
Opportunistic zoophilesRegular zoophilesExclusive zoophiles
Bestiality was accepted in some North American and Middle Eastern indigenous cultures.
She says only a few recent studies have taken data from volunteers in the community.
However, the teachings of the New Testament have been interpreted by some as not expressly forbidding bestiality.
Zoophiles tend to experience their first zoosexual feelings during adolescence, and tend to be secretive about it, hence limiting the ability for non-Internet communities to form:
Current anti-cruelty laws focus more specifically on animal welfare while anti-bestiality laws are aimed only at offenses to community "standards".
Infections that are transmitted from animals to humans are called zoonoses.
In ''Clerks II'' Randal orders a donkey show as a going away present for his best friend Dante, in which it is referred to as "interspecies erotica" by the male performer.
In psychology and sociology the word "zoophilia" is sometimes used without sexual implications.
Philip K. Dick also refers to a photo of a woman copulating with a Shetland Pony in ''Flow My Tears The Policeman Said''.
Some researchers distinguish between zoophilia (as a persistent sexual interest in animals) and bestiality (as sexual acts with animals), because bestiality is often not driven by a sexual preference for animals.
Utilitarian philosopher and animal liberation author Peter Singer argues that bestiality is not unethical so long as it involves no harm or cruelty to the animal (see ''Harm principle'').
One of the primary critiques of bestiality is that it is harmful to animals and necessarily abusive, because animals are unable to give or withhold consent.
However, the Hindu scriptures like the ''Bhagavata Purana'' and the ''Devi Bhagavata Purana'' having sex with animals, especially the cow, leads one to Hell, where the person is tormented by rubbing their bodies on trees with razor-sharp thorns.
Being fond of animals in general, or as pets, is accepted in Western society, and is usually respected or tolerated.
'It's an orientation, a lifestyle.'"
However, a number of the most oft-quoted studies, such as Miletski, were not published in peer-reviewed journals.
In literature, American novelist Kurt Vonnegut refers to a photo of a woman attempting sexual intercourse with a Shetland Pony in ''The Sirens of Titan'', ''Slaughterhouse Five'', and ''God Bless You, Mr. Rosewater''.
These groups rapidly drew together zoophiles, some of whom also created personal and social websites and internet forums.
Many Hungarian mainstream performers also appeared anonymously in animal pornography in their early careers.
There have been several significant modern books, from Masters (1962) to Beetz (2002); their research arrived at the following conclusions:
In New Zealand the possession, making or distribution of material promoting bestiality is illegal.
References to bestiality are not uncommon in some media, especially adult cartoon series such as ''Family Guy'' and ''South Park'', satirical comedy such as ''Borat'', and films (especially shock exploitation films), although a few broadcasters such as Howard Stern (who joked about bestiality dial-a-date on NBC) and Tom Binns (whose XFM London Breakfast Show resulted on one occasion in a live discussion about the ethics of zoophilic pornographic movies at peak child listening time) have been reprimanded by their stations for doing so.
''Polissons and Galipettes'' (re-released 2002 as "The Good Old Naughty Days") is a collection of early French silent films for brothel use, including some animal pornography, dating from around 1905 – 1930.
If a woman approaches any beast and lies with it, you shall kill the woman and the beast; they shall be put to death, their blood is upon them."
People who identify as zoophiles may feel their love for animals is romantic rather than purely sexual, and say this makes them different from those committing entirely sexually motivated acts of bestiality.
Rosenberger (1968) emphasizes that as far as cunnilingus is concerned, dogs require no training, and even Dekkers (1994) and Menninger (1951) admit that sometimes animals take the initiative and do so impulsively.
Under Section 143 of the Crimes Act 1961, individuals can serve a sentence of seven years duration for animal sexual abuse and the offence is considered 'complete' in the event of 'penetration'.
As with many other alternate lifestyles, broader networks began forming in the 1980s when participating in networked social groups became more common at home and elsewhere.
As of 2012, bestiality is illegal in 37 U.S. states.
By 1974, the farm population in the USA had declined by 80 percent compared with 1940, reducing the opportunity to live with animals; Hunt's 1974 study suggests that these demographic changes led to a significant change in reported occurrences of bestiality.
Some Christian theologians extend Matthew's view that even having thoughts of adultery is sinful to imply that thoughts of committing bestial acts are likewise sinful.
According to the Hindu tradition of erotic painting and sculpture, having sex with an animal is believed to be actually a human having sex with a God incarnated in the form of an animal.
Copulating with a female alpaca is still specifically against the law in Peru.
Nor is it a question of the sexual arousal of the defendant", "it could be argued that a person might possess such an image for the purposes of satire, political commentary or simple grossness," according to ''The Independent''.
Andrea Beetz states there is evidence that there can be violent zoosadistic approaches to sex with animals.
Medical research suggests that some zoophiles only become aroused by a specific species (such as horses), some zoophiles become aroused by multiple species (which may or may not include humans), and some zoophiles are not attracted to humans at all.
Weinberg and Williams observe that the internet can socially integrate an incredibly large number of people.
It is not an uncommon practice for dogs to attempt to copulate with ("hump") the legs of people of both genders.
A box-office success of the 1980s, ''24 Horas de Sexo Explícito'' featured zoophilia.
Some studies have found that a preference for animals is rare among people who engage in sexual contact with animals.
I wanted to make him feel good.'
While some laws are very specific, others employ vague terms such as "sodomy" or "bestiality", which lack legal precision and leave it unclear exactly which acts are covered.
Examples of zoonoses are Brucellosis, Q fever, leptospirosis, and toxocariasis.
The derivative noun "zoosexuality" is sometimes used by self-identified zoophiles in both support groups and on internet-based discussion forums to designate sexual orientation manifesting as romantic or emotional involvement with, or sexual attraction to, non-human animals.
number 50 out of around 5000), – and reputedly started in humor – along with personal bulletin boards and talkers, chief among them Sleepy's multiple worlds, Lintilla, and Planes of Existence, were among the first group media of this kind in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Sakura Sakurada is an AV idol known to have appeared in animal pornography, specifically in the AV ''The Dog Game'' in 2006.
There are a few references in Hindu scriptures to religious figures engaging in symbolic sexual activity with animals such as explicit depictions of people having sex with animals included amongst the thousands of sculptures of "Life events" on the exterior of the temple complex at Khajuraho.
In New Zealand, the 1989 Crimes Bill considered abolishing bestiality as a criminal offense, and instead viewing it as a mental health issue, but they did not, and people can still be prosecuted for it.
The popular newsgroup alt.sex.bestiality, said to be in the top 1% of newsgroup interest (i.e.
More recently, research has engaged three further directions – the speculation that at least some animals seem to enjoy a zoophilic relationship assuming sadism is not present, and can form an affectionate bond.
The distinction between zoophilia and zoosadism is a critical one to these researchers, and is highlighted by each of these studies.
Stephanie LaFarge, an assistant professor of psychiatry at the New Jersey Medical School, and Director of Counseling at the ASPCA, writes that two groups can be distinguished: bestialists, who rape or abuse animals, and zoophiles, who form an emotional and sexual attachment to animals.
People with zoophilia are known as "zoophiles", though also sometimes as "zoosexuals", or even very simply "zoos".
Miletski (1999) notes that information on sex with animals on the internet is often very emphatic as to what the zoophile believes gives pleasure and how to identify what is perceived as consent beforehand.
"Bestiosexuality" was discussed briefly by Allen (1979), but never became widely established.
'I felt like there was no one I could talk to about this.
Colin J. Williams and Martin Weinberg studied self-defined zoophiles via the internet and reported them as understanding the term ''zoophilia'' to involve concern for the animal's welfare, pleasure, and consent, as distinct from the self-labelled zoophiles' concept of "bestialists", whom the zoophiles in their study defined as focused on their own gratification.
Similar findings are also reported by Kinsey (cited by Masters), and others earlier in history.
The potential use of media for pornographic movies was seen from the start of the era of silent film.
Peer reviewed research into zoophilia in its own right started around 1960.
The zoophile community is not known to be particularly large compared to other subcultures which make use of the internet, so Weinberg and Williams surmised its aims and beliefs would likely change little as it grew.
Beetz argues that animals might be traumatized even by a non-violent, sexual approach from a human; however, Beetz also says that in some cases, non-abusive bestiality can be reciprocally pleasurable for both the human and non-human animal.
Several cultures built temples (Khajuraho, India) or other structures (Sagaholm, barrow, Sweden) with zoophilic carvings on the exterior, however at Khajuraho these depictions are not on the interior, perhaps depicting that these are things that belong to the profane world rather than the spiritual world, and thus are to be left outside.
"Animal sexual autonomy is regularly violated for human financial gain through procedures such as artificial insemination and slaughter.
RSV) and 20:15–16 ("If a man lies with a beast, he shall be put to death; and you shall kill the beast.
Some witches were accused of having congress with the devil in the form of an animal.
Because of its controversial nature, different countries vary in the discussion of bestiality.
In Canada a clarification of the anti-bestiality law was made in 2016 which legalizes most forms of sexual contact with animals other than penetration.
The internet and its predecessors made people able to search for information on topics which were not otherwise easily accessible and to communicate with relative safety and anonymity.
Human-animal role-playersRomantic zoophilesZoophilic fantasizers
Williams and Weinberg also quoted a British newspaper saying that ''zoophilia'' is a term used by "apologists" for ''bestiality''.
In addition, the Copper Inuit people had "no aversion to intercourse with live animals".
Often sexual matters are the subject of legal or regulatory requirement.
Some zoophiles and researchers draw a distinction between ''zoophilia'' and ''bestiality'', using the former to describe the desire to form sexual relationships with animals, and the latter to describe the sex acts alone.
Ernest Bornemann (1990, cited by Rosenbauer, 1997) coined the separate term ''zoosadism'' for those who derive pleasure – sexual or otherwise – from inflicting pain on animals.
Sexual intercourse between humans and non-human animals was not uncommon among certain Native American indigenous peoples, including the Hopi.
While primarily underground, there are a number of animal pornography actresses who specialize in bestiality movies.
'But I was always interested in animals, starting around age 10.
Zooerasty, sodomy, and zooerastia are other terms closely related to the subject but are less synonymous with the former terms, and are seldom used.
Zoophile activity and other sexual matters may be discussed, but only in an appropriate context and manner.
In one study, psychiatric patients were found to have a statistically significant higher prevalence rate (55 percent) of reported bestiality, both actual sexual contacts (45 percent) and sexual fantasy (30 percent) than the control groups of medical in-patients (10 percent) and psychiatric staff (15 percent).
Because of its controversial nature, people have developed arguments both for and against zoophilia.
Dr "Jacobus X", said to be a nom-de-plume for a French author, said this was clearly "before any known taboos against sex with animals existed."
In 1980s, "bestiality" was featured in Italian adult films with actresses like Denise Dior, Francesca Ray, and Marina Hedman, manifested early in the softcore flick ''Bestialità'' in 1976.
In a cave painting from at least 8000 BC in the Northern Italian Val Camonica a man is shown about to penetrate an animal.
In 2005 the UK broadcasting regulator (OFCOM) updated its code stating that freedom of expression is at the heart of any democratic state.
Masters (1962), Miletski (1999) and Weinberg (2003) each comment significantly on the social harm caused by misunderstandings regarding zoophilia: "This destroys the lives of many citizens".
Three key terms commonly used in regards to the subject — ''zoophilia'', ''bestiality'', and ''zoosexuality'' — are often used somewhat interchangeably.
Potters seem to have spent time depicting the practice, but this may be because they found the idea amusing.
Miletski believes that "Animals are capable of sexual consent – and even initiation – in their own way."
The percentage of males who reported sexual interactions with animals in 1974 was 4.9% (1948: 8.3%), and in females in 1974 was 1.9% (1953: 3.6%).
In the UK Section 63 of the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act 2008 criminalises possession of realistic pornographic images depicting sex with animals (see extreme pornography), including fake images and simulated acts, as well as images depicting sex with dead animals, where no crime has taken place in the production.
In a 2014 study, 3% of women and 2.2% of men reported fantasies about having sex with an animal.
Sexual contact with animals – in the form of bestiality or zoophilia – needs to be discussed more openly and investigated in more detail by scholars working in disciplines such as animal ethics, animal behavior, anthrozoology, psychology, mental health, sociology, and the law."
Beetz believes zoophilia is not an inclination which is chosen.
Similar restrictions apply in Germany (see above).
Although Krafft-Ebing also coined the term ''zooerasty'' for the paraphilia of exclusive sexual attraction to animals, that term has fallen out of general use.
Marc Epprecht states that authors such as Jacobus X do not deserve respect because their methodology is based on hearsay, and was designed for voyeuristic titillation of the reader.
In general contemporary usage, the term ''zoophilia'' may refer to sexual activity between human and non-human animals, the desire to engage in such, or to the specific paraphilia (''i.e.,'' the atypical arousal) which indicates a definite preference for non-human animals over humans as sexual partners.
Sexual arousal from watching animals mate is known as ''faunoiphilia''.
Laws which prohibit non-abusive bestiality have been criticized for being discriminatory, unjust and unconstitutional.
