They generally do not allow conversion to the faith.
The "damning indictment" that becoming Muslim was Un-Iranian only remained an idiom in Zoroastrian texts.
The later manuscripts all date from this millennium, the latest being from 1288, 590 years after the fall of the Sassanian Empire.
Zoroaster said these were evil spirits, workers of Angra Mainyu.
In Bukhara (in present-day Uzbekistan), resistance to Islam required the 9th-century Arab commander Qutaiba to convert his province four times.
According to the Iranian census data from 2011 the number of Zoroastrians in Iran was 25,271.
After this, Vohu Manah took him to the other six Amesha Spentas, where he received the completion of his vision.
Zoroaster's birth and early life are little documented.
In Zoroastrianism, the purpose in life is to "be among those who renew the world...to make the world progress towards perfection".
For the most part, Zoroastrianism does not have a notion of reincarnation, at least not until the final renovation of the world.
Hell contains foul smells and evil food, and souls are packed tightly together although they believe they are in total isolation.
Moreover, in his role as the one uncreated creator of all, Ahura Mazda is not the creator of ''druj'', which is "nothing", anti-creation, and thus (likewise) uncreated.
Ultimately, Muslim scholars like Al-Biruni found little records left of the belief of, for instance, the Khawarizmians, because figures like Qutayba ibn Muslim “extinguished and ruined in every possible way all those who knew how to write and read the Khawarizmi writing, who knew the history of the country and who studied their sciences.” As a result, “these things are involved in so much obscurity that it is impossible to obtain an accurate knowledge of the history of the country since the time of Islam...”
He also stated that human beings are given a right of choice, and because of cause and effect are also responsible for the consequences of their choices.
Some traditionalists recognize the children of mixed marriages as Zoroastrians.
However, the evil forces were trapped in the universe and could not retreat.
They are however quite different.
If read aloud, these books would still have been intelligible to the laity.
Scholars have argued that, since the protections are part of a ritual, they stem from theology rather than ecology.
Nonetheless, these texts have a strong influence on the religion.
Thus, a bonded individual owned by a Zoroastrian could automatically become a freeman by converting to Islam.
With possible roots dating back to the second millennium BCE, Zoroastrianism enters recorded history in the 5th-century BCE, and including a Mithraic Median prototype and Zurvanist Sassanid successor it served as the state religion of the pre-Islamic Iranian empires from around 600 BCE to 650 CE.
These Amesha Spenta are in turn assisted by a league of lesser principles, the Yazatas, each "Worthy of Worship" and each again a hypostasis of a moral or physical aspect of creation.
The Parsis would then cease to be called a community and will be labeled a "tribe".
Additionally, the divinities, or yazatas, are present-day Zoroastrian angels (Dhalla, 1938).
From the 19th century onward, the Parsis gained a reputation for their education and widespread influence in all aspects of society.
The world will fall into winter, and Angra Mainyu's most fearsome miscreant, Azi Dahaka, will break free and terrorize the world.
From the bull's seed grew all beneficial plants and animals of the world, and from the man's seed grew a plant whose leaves became the first human couple.
Small Zoroastrian communities may be found all over the world, with a continuing concentration in Western India, Central Iran, and Southern Pakistan.
One example of this was a legend that Husayn, son the fourth caliph Ali and grandson of Islam's prophet Muhammad, had married a captive Sassanid princess named Shahrbanu.
In Khorasan in the northeastern Iran, a 10th-century Iranian nobleman brought together four Zoroastrian priests to transcribe a Sassanid-era Middle Persian work titled ''Book of the Lord'' (''Khwaday Namag'') from Pahlavi script into Arabic script.
The religion would be professed many centuries following the demise of the Achaemenids in mainland Persia and the core regions of the former Achaemenid Empire, most notably Anatolia, Mesopotamia, and the Caucasus.
Zoroastrians currently seek official status for their religion in Iraqi Kurdistan.
As in many other faiths, Zoroastrians are encouraged to marry others of the same faith, but this is not a requirement.
Among them were several groups who ventured to Gujarat on the western shores of the Indian subcontinent, where they finally settled.
Following the fall of the Sassanid Empire in 651 CE, many Zoroastrians migrated.
The Avesta is the religious book of Zoroastrians that contains a collection of sacred texts.
Due to its ties to the Christian Roman Empire, Persia's arch-rival since Parthian times, the Sassanids were suspicious of Roman Christianity, and after the reign Constantine the Great sometimes persecuted it.
But there was a slow but steady social and economic pressure to convert.
The name ''Zoroaster'' is a Greek rendering of the name ''Zarathustra''.
Zoroaster's ideas were not taken up quickly; he originally only had one convert: his cousin Maidhyoimanha.
* There is only one path and that is the path of Truth.
The religious philosophy of Zoroaster divided the early Iranian gods.
Yazd became the seat of the Iranian high priests during Mongol Il-Khanate rule, when the "best hope for survival for a non-Muslim was to be inconspicuous."
In time, this poll-tax came to be used as a means to humble the non-Muslims, and a number of laws and restrictions evolved to emphasize their inferior status.
While the Parsees in India have traditionally been opposed to proselytizing, probably for historical reasons, and even considered it a crime for which the culprit may face expulsion, Iranian Zoroastrians have never been opposed to conversion, and the practice has been endorsed by the Council of Mobeds of Tehran.
They call their language Dari (not to be confused with the Dari of Afghanistan).
Ritual exposure is only practiced by Zoroastrian communities of the Indian subcontinent, in locations where it is not illegal and diclofenac poisoning has not led to the virtual extinction of scavenger birds.
He was born into a culture with a polytheistic religion, which included animal sacrifice and the ritual use of intoxicants, quite similar to early forms of Hinduism in India.
The texts that remain today are the Gathas, Yasna, Visperad and the Vendidad.
During the final assault, the sun and moon will darken and humankind will lose its reverence for religion, family, and elders.
Herodotus' ''The Histories'' (completed ''c.''
The local religious authorities opposed his ideas, considering that their faith, power, and particularly their rituals, were threatened by Zoroaster's teaching against over-ritualising religious ceremonies.
In older English sources, the terms ''Gheber'' and ''Gueber'' (both deriving from Persian for ''infidel'', compare ''giaour'') were used to refer to Zoroastrians; however, these terms are considered offensive and have fallen out of use.
According to the Zoroastrian story of creation, Ahura Mazda existed in light in goodness above, while Angra Mainyu existed in darkness and ignorance below.
The Abbasids zealously persecuted heretics, and although this was directed mainly at Muslim sectarians, it also created a harsher climate for non-Muslims.
Two decrees in particular encouraged the transition to a preponderantly Islamic society.
Spenta Mainyu adjoined unto "truth" oppose the Spirit's opposite,  Angra Mainyu and its forces born of Akəm Manah (“evil thinking”).
Crucial to the present-day survival of Zoroastrianism was a migration from the northeastern Iranian town of "Sanjan in south-western Khorasan", to Gujarat, in western India.
440&nbsp;BCE) includes a description of Greater Iranian society with what may be recognizably Zoroastrian features, including exposure of the dead.
The final savior of the world, Saoshyant, will be born to a virgin impregnated by the seed of Zoroaster while bathing in a lake.
Many of these are titled restorationists, progressives or "reformists".
In the final renovation, all of creation—even the souls of the dead that were initially banished to "darkness"—will be reunited in Ahura Mazda, returning to life in the undead form.
All of these works are in the Middle Persian dialect of that period (free of Arabic words), and written in the difficult Pahlavi script (hence the adoption of the term "Pahlavi" as the name of the variant of the language, and of the genre, of those Zoroastrian books).
Zoroastrianism as a religion was not firmly established until several centuries later.
Although the Abbasids were deadly foes of Zoroastrianism, the brand of Islam they propagated throughout Iran became in turn ever more "Zoroastrianized", making it easier for Iranians to embrace Islam.
In 2011 the Tehran Mobeds Anjuman announced that for the first time in the history  of Iran and of the Zoroastrian communities worldwide, women had been ordained in Iran and North America as mobedyars, meaning women mobeds (Zoroastrian priests).
Zoroastrians of the diaspora are primarily located in Great Britain and the former British colonies, particularly Canada and Australia, as well as in the American state of California where they form part of the Iranian American community.
He is known as ''Zartosht'' and ''Zardosht'' in Persian and ''Zaratosht'' in Gujarati.
The struggle between Zoroastrianism and Islam declined in the 10th and 11th centuries.
One is either greeted at the bridge by a beautiful, sweet-smelling maiden or by an ugly, foul-smelling old woman.
On the other hand, Zoroastrianism itself inherited ideas from other belief systems and, like other "practiced" religions, accommodates some degree of syncretism.
Thus, Zoroastrianism can be said to be a universalist religion with respect to salvation.
Zoroastrian morality is then to be summed up in the simple phrase, "good thoughts, good words, good deeds" (''Humata'', ''Hukhta'', ''Hvarshta'' in Avestan), for it is through these that ''asha'' is maintained and ''druj'' is kept in check.
Given that many of the ''Denkard''s statements-as-fact have since been refuted among scholars, the tale of the library is widely accepted to be fictional (Kellens, 2002).
Zoroastrianism enters recorded history in the mid-5th century BCE.
Consequently, scripture enjoins the safe disposal of the dead in a manner such that a corpse does not pollute the good creation.
Through and after the Hellenistic periods in the aforementioned regions, the religion would be strongly revived as a major thing.
After 12 years of little success, Zoroaster left his home.
Born into the Spitama clan, he worked as a priest.
Communities exist in Tehran, as well as in Yazd, Kerman and Kermanshah, where many still speak an Iranian language distinct from the usual Persian.
The rest of the materials from the Avesta are called "Avestan fragments".
According to later Zoroastrian legend (''Denkard'' and the ''Book of Arda Viraf''), many sacred texts were lost when Alexander the Great's troops invaded Persepolis and subsequently destroyed the royal library there.
Ahura Mazda created the floating, egg-shaped universe in two parts: first the spiritual (''menog'') and 3,000 years later, the physical (''getig'').
The year of arrival on the subcontinent cannot be precisely established, and Parsi legend and tradition assigns various dates to the event.
"Power and worldly-advantage" now lay with followers of Islam, and although the "official policy was one of aloof contempt, there were individual Muslims eager to proselytize and ready to use all sorts of means to do so."
Along with these texts is the communal household prayer book called the Khordeh Avesta, which contains the Yashts and the Siroza.
In the late 19th century, the moral and immoral forces came to be represented by ''Spenta Mainyu'' and its antithesis ''Angra Mainyu'', the "good spirit" and "evil spirit" emanations of Ahura Mazda, respectively.
Zoroaster died in his late 70s.
On the fourth day after death, the soul is reunited with its ''fravashi'', in which the experiences of life in the material world are collected for the continuing battle in the spiritual world.
More recently the Zoroastrian faith has gained strength among the Kurds in Iraq, claiming up to 100,000 adherents as of 2015.
Whether a vast collection of (semi-)religious texts "written on parchment in gold ink", as suggested by the ''Denkard'', actually existed remains a matter of speculation, but is unlikely.
Only a fraction of the texts survive today.
Besides the Zoroastrian diaspora, the older Mithraic faith Yazdânism is still practised amongst the Kurds.
Zoroastrian communities comprise two main groups of people: those of South Asian Zoroastrian background known as Parsis (or Parsees), and those of Central Asian background.
The old woman leads the dead down a bridge that narrows until the departed falls off into the abyss of hell.
The descendants of that group are today known as the ''Parsis''—"as the Gujaratis, from long tradition, called anyone from Iran"—who today represent the larger of the two groups of Zoroastrians.
With Iranian (especially Persian) support, the Abbasids overthrew the Umayyads in 750, and in the subsequent caliphate government—that nominally lasted until 1258—Muslim Iranians received marked favor in the new government, both in Iran and at the capital in Baghdad.
Reward, punishment, happiness, and grief all depend on how individuals live their lives.
Zoroastrian hell is reformative; punishments fit the crimes, and souls do not rest in eternal damnation.
The first three times the citizens reverted to their old religion.
The compilation of these ancient texts was successfully established underneath the Mazdean priesthood and the Sassanian emperors.
Superficially such a comparison seem apt, as both are dualistic and Manichaeism adopted many of the Yazatas for its own pantheon.
India's 2001 Census found 69,601 Parsi Zoroastrians.
In Zoroastrian liturgy the term is used as a title for an individual who has been formally inducted into the religion in a ''Navjote'' ceremony.
Those who do evil have themselves to blame for their ruin.
This concept of ''asha'' versus the ''druj'' should not be confused with the good-versus-evil battle evident in western religions, for although both forms of opposition express moral conflict, the ''asha'' versus ''druj'' concept is more systemic and less personal, representing, for instance, chaos (that opposes order); or "uncreation", evident as natural decay (that opposes creation); or more simply "the lie" (that opposes truth and righteousness).
The descendants of those refugees are today known as the Parsis.
It is vital to the practice, and according to Hoshang Bhadha,
The ''Oxford English Dictionary'' records use of the term ''Zoroastrianism'' in 1874 in Archibald Sayce's ''Principles of Comparative Philology''.
But the Sassanids tolerated or even sometimes favored the Christianity of the Persian Church.
The usurper, pretending to be Cyrus' younger son Smerdis, took power shortly thereafter.
It is through Spenta Mainyu that transcendental Ahura Mazda is immanent in humankind, and through which the Creator interacts with the world.
Here, in their lives, they are active participants in the conflict, and it is their ''duty'' to defend order, which would decay without counter''action''.
Although the administration of the state was rapidly Islamicized and subsumed under the Umayyad Caliphate, in the beginning "there was little serious pressure" exerted on newly subjected people to adopt Islam.
The nobility and city-dwellers were the first to convert, with Islam more slowly being accepted among the peasantry and landed gentry.
This mitigated the antagonism between Arabs and Iranians, but sharpened the distinction between Muslims and non-Muslims.
In recent years, the United States has become a significant destination of Zoroastrian populations, holding the second largest population of Zoroastrians after India.
The number is imprecise because of wildly diverging counts in Iran.
Strabo furthermore relates, were "noteworthy enclosures; and in their midst there is an altar, on which there is a large quantity of ashes and where the magi keep the fire ever burning."
As expressions and aspects of Creation, Ahura Mazda emanated the Amesha Spentas ("Bounteous Immortals"), that are each the hypostasis and representative of one aspect of that Creation.
The reverence for Yazatas (divine spirits) emphasizes the preservation of nature (Avesta: Yasnas 1.19, 3.4, 16.9; Yashts 6.3-4, 10.13)."
'''Zoroastrianism''', or more natively '''Mazdayasna''', is one of the world's oldest religions, "combining a cosmogonic dualism and eschatological monotheism in a manner unique … among the major religions of the world."
Zoroastrianism was suppressed from the 7th century onwards following the Muslim conquest of Persia.
''Daena'' has been used to mean religion, faith, law, and even as a translation for the Hindu and Buddhist term Dharma.
Post-Zoroastrian scripture introduced the concept of Ahriman, the Devil, which was effectively a personification of Angra Mainyu.
Prior to being born, the ''urvan'' (soul) of an individual is still united with its ''fravashi'' (guardian spirit), which has existed since Mazda created the universe.
In addition, and strongly influenced by Babylonian and Akkadian practices, the Achaemenids popularized shrines and temples, hitherto alien forms of worship.
Owing to the despotic rule of Cambyses and his long absence in Egypt, "the whole people, Persians, Medes and all the other nations" acknowledged the usurper, especially as he granted a remission of taxes for three years (Herodotus iii.
Both water and fire are considered life-sustaining, and both water and fire are represented within the precinct of a fire temple.
Some of the deities of the old religion, the ''Daevas'' (''Devas'' in Sanskrit), appeared to delight in war and strife.
He then created the universe itself in order to ensnare evil.
Iranian Zoroastrians were historically called ''Gabr''s, originally without a pejorative connotation but in the present-day derogatorily applied to all non-Muslims.
In any case, Ahura Mazda's creation—evident is widely agreed as ''asha'', truth and order—is the antithesis of chaos, which is evident as ''druj'', falsehood and disorder.
During the period of their centuries long suzerainty over the Caucasus, the Sassanids made attempts to promote Zoroastrianism there with considerable successes, and it was prominent in the pre-Christian Caucasus (especially modern-day Azerbaijan).
However, the Zoroastrian personal judgment is not final.
Ahura Mazda will ultimately prevail over the evil Angra Mainyu or Ahriman, at which point the universe will undergo a cosmic renovation and time will end.
Another popular means to distress Zoroastrians was to maltreat dogs, as these animals are sacred in Zoroastrianism.
The first edict, adapted from an Arsacid and Sassanid one (but in those to the advantage of Zoroastrians), was that only a Muslim could own Muslim slaves or indentured servants.
Saoshyant and Ahura Mazda will offer a bull as a final sacrifice for all time, and all humans will become immortal.
Zoroastrianism is often compared with the Manichaeism.
Shapur I sent priests to locate the scientific text portions of the Avesta that were in the possession of the Greeks.
In Zoroastrian cosmogony, water and fire are respectively the second and last primordial elements to have been created, and scripture considers fire to have its origin in the waters.
Humanity requires two judgments because there are as many aspects to our being: spiritual (''menog'') and physical (''getig'').
According to one archaeological examination, the ruins of the palace of Xerxes bear traces of having been burned (Stolze, 1882).
The latter is often interpreted as "duty" but can also mean social order, right conduct, or virtue.
Gherardo Gnoli, in ''The Encyclopaedia of Religion'', says that "we can assert that Manichaeism has its roots in the Iranian religious tradition and that its relationship to Mazdaism, or Zoroastrianism, is more or less like that of Christianity to Judaism".
Zoroastrians usually pray in the presence of some form of fire (which can be considered evident in any source of light), and the culminating rite of the principle act of worship constitutes a "strengthening of the waters".
Zoroaster's teachings focused on responsibility, and did not introduce a devil, per se.
Restorationists refer only to the compositions of Zoroaster, and thus only consider the Gathas, the other texts only having value as far as they elaborate on some Gathic point and do not contradict the Gathic teaching.
For these, ''asha'' was the course of everything observable—the motion of the planets and astral bodies; the progression of the seasons; and the pattern of daily nomadic herdsman life, governed by regular metronomic events such as sunrise and sunset.
Many traits of Zoroastrianism can be traced back to the culture and beliefs of the prehistorical Indo-Iranian period, that is, to the time before the migrations that led to the Indo-Aryans and Iranics becoming distinct peoples.
Here, two copies were created, one which was put in the house of archives, and the other put in the Imperial treasury.
In the main, once the conquest was over and "local terms were agreed on", the Arab governors protected the local populations in exchange for tribute.
During life, the ''fravashi'' acts as a guardian and protector.
Others have responded that, since the scripture calls for the protection of water, earth, fire, air, as once of its strongest precepts, it is, in effect, an ecological religion: "It is not surprising that Mazdaism (another term for Zoroastrianism) is called the ﬁrst ecological religion.
This assault turned the perfectly flat, peaceful, and ever day-lit world into a mountainous, violent place that is half night.
In Zoroastrianism, good transpires for those who do righteous deeds.
Leading characteristics, such as messianism, heaven and hell, and free will are said to have influenced other religious systems, including Second Temple Judaism, Gnosticism, Christianity, and Islam.
This calendar attributed to the Achaemenid period is still in use today.
Despite economic and social incentives to convert, Zoroastrianism remained strong in some regions, particularly in those furthest away from the Caliphate capital at Baghdad.
He proclaimed that there is only one God, the singularly creative and sustaining force of the Universe.
He had a wife, three sons, and three daughters.
''Daena'' should not be confused with the fundamental principle ''asha'' (Vedic ''rta''), the equitable law of the universe, which governed the life of the ancient Indo-Iranians.
They have existed independently of each other for all time, and manifest contrary substances.
In the Cappadocian kingdom, whose territory was formerly an Achaemenid possession, Persian colonists, cut off from their co-religionists in Iran proper, continued to practice the faith Zoroastrianism of their forefathers; and there Strabo, observing in the first century B.C., records (XV.3.15) that these "fire kindlers" possessed many "holy places of the Persian Gods", as well as fire temples.
Under Shapur II, Arderbad Mahrespandand revised the canon to ensure its orthodox character, while under Khosrow I, the Avesta was translated into Pahlavi.
Many aspects of Zoroastrianism are present in the culture and mythologies of the peoples of the Greater Iran, not least because Zoroastrianism was a dominant influence on the people of the cultural continent for a thousand years.
Today Zoroastrianism can be divided in three different sects or dominions: restorationists, progressives and traditionalists (or isolationists).
According to Herodotus i.101, the Magi were the sixth tribe of the Medians (until the unification of the Persian empire under Cyrus the Great, all Iranians were referred to as "Mede" or "Mada" by the peoples of the Ancient World), who appear to have been the priestly caste of the Mesopotamian-influenced branch of Zoroastrianism today known as Zurvanism, and who wielded considerable influence at the courts of the Median emperors.
Middle Persian and Pahlavi works created in the 9th and 10th century contain many religious Zoroastrian books, as most of the writers and copyists were part of the Zoroastrian clergy.
Finally, the governor made their religion "difficult for them in every way", turned the local fire temple into a mosque, and encouraged the local population to attend Friday prayers by paying each attendee two dirhams.
In the wake of Achaemenid expansion, shrines were constructed throughout the empire and particularly influenced the role of Mithra, Aredvi Sura Anahita, Verethregna and Tishtrya, all of which, in addition to their original (proto-)Indo-Iranian functions, now also received Perso-Babylonian functions.
''The Histories'' is a primary source of information on the early period of the Achaemenid era (648–330&nbsp;BCE), in particular with respect to the role of the Magi.
Thus, according to scholar Mary Boyce, "it was no longer the Zoroastrians alone who stood for patriotism and loyalty to the past."
Manichaeism's basic doctrine was that the world and all corporeal bodies were constructed from the substance of Satan, an idea that is fundamentally at odds with the Zoroastrian notion of a world that was created by God and that is all good, and any corruption of it is an effect of the bad.
Zoroastrianism consequently shares elements with the historical Vedic religion that also has its origins in that era.
Mountains will again flatten and valleys will rise; heaven will descend to the moon, and the earth will rise to meet them both.
By the time of the founding of the Achaemenid Empire, Zoroastrianism was already a well-established religion.
Following the unification of the Median and Persian empires in 550 BCE, Cyrus the Great and, later, his son Cambyses II curtailed the powers of the Magi after they had attempted to sow dissent following their loss of influence.
Other scholars assert that since Zoroastrianism's divinity covers both being and mind as immanent entities, it is better described as a belief in an immanent self-creating universe with consciousness as its special attribute, thereby putting Zoroastranism in the pantheistic fold where it can be easily traced to its shared origin with Indian Brahmanism.
Traditionalists or isolationists are almost solely Parsis and accept, beside the Gathas and Avesta, also the Middle Persian works called 'Nasks of the Sassanians'.
The contesting force to Ahura Mazda was called Angra Mainyu, or angry spirit.
Diodorus Siculus's ''Bibliotheca historica'', which was completed circa 60 BCE, appears to substantiate this Zoroastrian legend (Diod.
Many of these texts are responses to the tribulations of the time, and all of them include exhortations to stand fast in their religious beliefs.
* Humata, Hukhta, Huvarshta, which mean: Good Thoughts, Good Words, Good Deeds.
In Iran, emigration, out-marriage and low birth rates are likewise leading to a decline in the Zoroastrian population.
India is considered to be home to the largest Zoroastrian population in the world.
Angra Mainyu created an opposite, evil being for each good being, except for humans, which he found he could not match.
Ascribed to the teachings of the Iranian prophet Zoroaster (or Zarathustra), he exalted their deity of wisdom, Ahura Mazda (''Wise Lord''), as its Supreme Being.
Its basic maxims include:
In Pakistan, they number fewer than 1,700, mostly living in Karachi.
The cities where Arab governors resided were particularly vulnerable to such pressures, and in these cases the Zoroastrians were left with no choice but to either conform or migrate to regions that had a more amicable administration.
In Zoroastrian eschatology, a 3,000-year struggle between good and evil will be fought, punctuated by evil's final assault.
In time, a tradition evolved by which Islam was made to appear as a partly Iranian religion.
Other Zoroastrian communities either cremate their dead, or bury them in graves that are cased with lime mortar.
The Zarathushtri also practice traditional head covering ritual similar to that of Judaism.
Humans' actions under their free will determine the outcome.
These injunctions are the doctrinal basis of the fast-fading traditional practice of ritual exposure, most commonly identified with the so-called Towers of Silence for which there is no standard technical term in either scripture or tradition.
A number of the Zoroastrian texts that today are part of the greater compendium of the Avesta have been attributed to that period.
